INSIDE THE THIRD REICH 



INSIDE 

THE THIRD 

REICH 



MEMOIRS 
BY 

ALBERT SPEER 

Translated from the German by 
RICHARD and CLARA WINSTON 

Introduction by Eugene Davidson 



THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 



Contents 



INTRODUCTION BY EUGENE DAVIDSON XI 

foreword xxiii 

PART 

ONE 



1 Origins and Youth 

Youth— Life at home— Schooling— Inflation— Assistant to Tessenow— 
Marriage 



2, Profession and Vocation iq 

Offer from Afghanistan— Architect without commissions— Boating 
tours— The election of September 14, 1930— National Socialism and 
the Technical Institute— First Hitler rally— Goebbels in the Sport- 
palast— Joining the party 



3 Junction 21 

First party assignment in Berlin— Back in Mannheim— Hitler's Ber- 
lin demonstration— Renovating the party headquarters and the 
Propaganda Ministry— D6cor for the Party Rally, May 1933— My 
client Hider— At home with Hider 

(v) 



Contents ( vi 
4 My Catalyst 3* 

Hitler's guest-My client Goering-Traveling with Hitler-Hitler's 
thought-Hitler's views on art-The Old Fighters-At Obersalzberg 
Mountain walks with Eva Braun— Cheers and obsessions— Hitler the 
architect 

5 Architectural Megalomania So 

The Roehm putsch— Papen expelled from his office— Hindenburg's 
funeral— First major assignment— Theory of ruin value— Cathedral 
of light— Cornerstone layings— Plans for Nuremberg— Architecture 
of a Great Power 

6 The Greatest Assignment ji 

Plans for Berlin— Rivaling Vienna and Paris— Hitler and his archi- 
tects—The German pavilion at the Paris World's Fair— Neoclassi- 
cism in our times— Abortive travels in France— Neurath's obstinacy 



7 Obersalzberg 8g 

Bormann and Hitler— The day at Obersalzberg— Teatime talk- 
Hitler's rage— Retirement in Linz— Hitler's prediction 



8 The New Chancellery 102 

The assignment— Hitler's illness— Morell— Events of 1938: Cabinet 
changes, Austria, Munich, November 9— A bad omen— Hacha in the 
new Chancellery 



9 A Day in the Chancellery 117 

Waiting— Hess the eccentric— The leadership's "style"— The radicals, 
Bormann and Goebbels— Jokes for Hitler— Dull evenings— Hitler and 
music 



10 Our Empire Style 132 

"You've all gone completely crazy"— Laying out the grand avenue 
—Megalomania— Deadlines— Costs— Boom in architecture— Hitler's 
sketches— Affairs in the Goebbels family— Incognito to Italy— Hitler's 
fiftieth birthday— With the Wagner family in Bayreuth— Frau 
Goebbels 



vii ) Contents 

11 The Globe 151 

Hitler's power center-The biggest building in the world-A Reich- 
stag for one hundred forty million people— Hitler's palace— Fear of 
uprisings— Empire style— The globe 

12 The Descent Begins 160 

The Pact— Northern lights over Obersalzberg— "Blood"— War and 
peace parties— Hitler goes to war— At headquarters— Armistice— 
With Hitler in Paris— Wartime building program 

13 Excess 174 

Victory parades under the triumphal arch— Hess's flight to England 
—Hitler and Goering as art collectors— War against the Soviet Union 
—The pencil line along the Urals— Captured weapons for the grand 
avenue— Trondheim and the East— My last art tour— Disaster in 
Russia— The second man 



PART 

TWO 



14 Start in My New Office 289 

Flight to Dnepropetrovsk— Visit to headquarters— Talks with Hitler 
and Todt— Death of Todt— Audience with Hitler— Appointment as 
Minister— Goering's scene— First official acts— Obstacles overcome— 
The Cabinet Room 



15 Organized Improvisation 204 

The new organizational scheme— Goering's threat to resign— Archi- 
tect and technology— Industrial self-responsibility— Organization of 
the Ministry— Successes 



16 Sins of Omission 214 

The technological war— Efforts at full mobilization— Party opposi- 
tion—More steel for the war— Transportation crisis— The muffed 
atom bomb 



Contents ( viii 

17 Commander in Chief Hitler 230 

Armaments conferences with Hitler— My system— Hitler's knowledge 
of technology— Demonstrating weapons— Visits in southern Russia- 
Ascent of Mount Elbrus— Hitler's situation conferences— The Allied 
landing in North Africa— Goering and Stalingrad 

18 Intrigues 252 

Bormann— Cabinet meetings again— Need for austerity— Discussions 
with Goebbels— Alliances— Bormann's system— Dealing with Goeb- 
bels, dealing with Goering— Fiasco— Himmler's threat 

19 Second Man in the State 267 

Goebbels joins Bormann— Hitler reprimands Goebbels— No prisoners 
—Bridge to Asia— Guderian and Zeitzler agree— Minister of War 
Production 

20 Bombs 278 

The new front— Goering's deceptions— The Ruhr dams— Pinpoint 
bombing strategy— The raids on Hamburg— Ball bearings— The 
enemy's strategic mistake— The bombing of Berlin— Hitler's mistakes 
Galland against Goering— The flight from reality 

21 Hitler in the Autumn of 1943 292 

The change in Hitler— His rigidity and exhaustion— Daily routine- 
Hitler and his dog— The Prince of Hesse— Mussolini freed and 
cheated 

22 Downhill 309 

Armaments work in occupied territories— Agreement with the 
French— Sauckel's reaction— Speech to the Gauleiters— Hitler lies to 
his generals— Trip to Lapland— Infantry program— Trouble with 
Sauckel— Goering's birthday 

PART 

THREE 



23 Illness 327 

Dangerous plots— Convalescence— The Fighter Aircraft Staff- 
Hitler's emotion and new estrangement— Candidates for my office 
—Thoughts of resignation— Back at the Berghof— Hitler yields- 
Praise in The Observer 



ix ) Contents 

24 The War Thrice Lost 346 

Return to work— Strategic bombing of fuel production— Memoranda 
—Rommel and coastal defense— The invasion of Normandy begins— 
Takeover of aircraft production-Hitler's speech to the industrialists 

25 Blunders, Secret Weapons, and the SS 362 

Jet fighters as bombers— Peenemiinde— Concentration camp prisoners 
in war industry— Himmler invades rocket research— Plans for SS 
economic expansion— Stealing workers— Auschwitz 

26 Operation Valkyrie 37 7 

Talks with the conspirators— The news reaches Goebbels— In the 
center of the counterstroke— Bendlerstrasse— Meeting with Fromm— 
Himmler calls on Goebbels— Kaltenbrunner's visit— On the conspira- 
tors' lists— Aftermath— Arrests— Films of the executions 

27 The Wave from the West 396 

Goebbels gains power— Hitler loses authority— Visits to the front- 
September 1944: military impotence— Hitler's plans for destruction 
—Outwitting his arguments— Shortage of chromium— Declining pro- 
duction—Secret weapons and propaganda 

28 The Plunge 412 

Breakup of organization— Emergency program— The Ardennes offen- 
sive—Upper Silesia— "The war is lost"— Memorandum— Reaction to 
Yalta— Poison Gas for Hitler's bunker 

29 Doom 433 

Anxiety over the postwar period— Countermeasures— Another memo- 
randum—Hitler's reply— Hitler's death sentence upon industry 

30 Hitler's Ultimatum 444 

The Ruhr threatened— Feverish travels— Sabotage of orders— Hitler's 
twenty-four-hour ultimatum— An unread letter— Hitler yields again 

31 The Thirteenth Hour 461 

Radio speech— Finale of Gotterdammerung— Roosevelt's death— Ley 
invents death rays— Eva Braun— Preparations for flight— Plans for 
suicide— Hitler's last delusions— The "rebel speech"— Collaboration 
with Heinrici— Berlin will not be defended 



Contents ( x 

22 Annihilation 471 

Hitler's condition— Fear and pity— Last birthday— Goering goes to 
Berchtesgaden— My flight— In the Hamburg radio bunker— Last visit 
to Hitler— Situation conference— Farewell to Magda Goebbels and 
Eva Braun— Last words with Hitler— Himmler and his notions— 
Doenitz— Tears— Responsibility 

EPILOGUE 



33 Stations of Imprisonment 4qq 

Flensburg— Mondorf— Versailles— Kransberg— Nuremberg 

34 Nuremberg 507 
Interrogations— Collective responsibility— Cross-examination 

35 Conclusions 51Q 
The judgment— The sentence— My own fate— Skepticism 

AFTERWORD 525 

NOTES 527 

INDEX 5J1 

PHOTOGRAPHS FOLLOW PAGES l66, 286 AND 406 



Introduction 



The unresolved questions of the period of national socialism remain 
with us. The enormity of the crimes committed, the huge scale of 
victory and defeat are subjects of continuous exploration and analysis. 
How could one of the chief centers of the civilized world have become a 
torture chamber for millions of people, a country ruled by criminals so 
effectively that it conquered most of Europe, moving out toward other 
continents, planting its swastika standards from Norway to the Caucasus 
and Africa before it was brought down at the cost of some thirty million 
lives? What had happened to the nation of thinkers and poets, the "good" 
Germans that the nineteenth century knew? And how did intelligent, 
well-intentioned, educated, principled people like Albert Speer become 
so caught up in the movement, so captivated by Hitler's magnetism that 
they could accept everything— the secret police, the concentration camps, 
the nonsensical rhetoric of Aryan heroism and anti-Semitism, the slaughter 
of the Fuehrers wars— and devote all their resources to keeping this re- 
gime in power? In these memoirs of the man who was very likely the 
most gifted member of the government hierarchy we have some of the 
answers to these riddles and as complete a view as we are ever likely to 
get of the inside of the Nazi state. 

When he joined the Party in 1931, Speer had never given much 
thought to politics. He came from an upper-middle-class family, one of 
the most prominent in Mannheim, supported in high style by the father's 

( xi ) 



Introduction ( xii 

flourishing architectural practice and involved mainly in the cultural and 
social life of the city. Speer's father did read the liberal Frankfurter Zei- 
tung, an unusual paper for a conservative architect to have in his home, 
but he utterly rejected the Nazis because he believed them to be more 
socialist than nationalist. The family suffered financial reverses during 
the inflation in 1923 but always lived well in a burgerlicher comfort en- 
joyed by very few people in post- World War I Germany. 

Albert Speer was not one of the disoriented, rejected millions who 
were out of a job and a place in society; he joined the National Socialist 
Party because his faint interest in politics was roused more than it had 
ever been before when he heard Hitler give a speech in 1931. Most young 
men brought up like Speer did not care much for Hitler and his street 
fighters in 1931; Hitler's strength went up and down with the numbers of 
unemployed. Left-wing Berlin, where Speer heard Hitler speak, gave Hit- 
ler only 22.5 percent of the vote in the last free election held in November 
1932, and even after the Reichstag fire, when almost 44.0 percent of the 
rest of Germany voted for Hitler, the National Socialists got only 31.3 per- 
cent of the Berlin vote. So Speer made his own decisions in his own way. 
Like a good many other people he was looking for a new, powerful doc- 
trine to clear up his own thinking. He had dabbled in philosophical ideas; 
had read Spengler and become depressed by him; had heard the proph- 
ecies of doom from the post- World War I intellectuals and seen them 
borne out in the confusion and hopelessness of the cities; and now he was 
rejecting much of what he had been brought up to believe in because 
none of it seemed to have any relevance to the chaos around him. 

The speech Speer heard was made for university and technical stu- 
dents and faculties. Like every skillful politician, Hitler pitched his style 
to his audience. He wore a sober blue suit instead of his street fighters 
brown shirt and spoke earnestly, in a relatively low key, of a revitalized 
Germany. To Speer, his conviction seemed to be an antidote to Spengler's 
pessimism and at the same time fulfillment of his prophecy of the Zra- 
perator to come. These were the good tidings, it seemed, the complete 
answer to the threat of Communism and the political futility of the Wei- 
mar governments. In a time when nothing in the democratic process 
seemed to work, Hitler's words sounded a loud call to many young men 
who by 1931 were convinced of the necessity for bold, new remedies for 
Germany's deep troubles. The succession of patched-up coalition govern- 
ments that governed neither long nor well and could find no answers at 
all to Germany's economic depression, social unrest, and military power- 
lessness had to be replaced by a man and a party with new solutions, by 
a leader who knew the meaning of strength and law and order. The anti- 
Semitism of the Nazis could be condoned or ignored as merely a passing 
"children's disease" if one liked the rest of their program. As Machiavelli 



xiii ) Introduction 

once wrote, political misjudgments and wrong turns are like tuberculosis, 
hard to detect and easy to cure in the beginning and easy to diagnose and 
very hard to cure at the end. 

But it was not the Party as a political instrument that appealed to 
Speer. What drew him was the personality of the Fuehrer, the scale of 
the blueprints for recovery, and later the wonderful opportunity to design 
buildings. It was through Hitler and the Party that Speer could realize 
his youthful architectural ambitions and acquire new ones beyond any- 
thing he had imagined. He tried not to see any of the barbarities com- 
mitted by the National Socialist Party or the state although, as he tells us, 
the broken panes of the Jewish shops vandalized during the Kristallnacht 
lay shattered in front of him. But what he was able to accomplish in his 
profession and later in his key government posts so dazzled his vision that 
he could shut his eyes to almost everything, no matter how repulsive, 
that might disturb his purposes. What he wanted to do was to design 
and build and to work for a new order. Here the means were abundantly 
at hand if he did not look too closely at the price being paid for them. 

Speer has had a long time to ask himself questions about his role in 
the Third Reich. At Nuremberg he was sentenced to twenty years for 
crimes against humanity and for war crimes; he served this sentence to the 
last hour. Some of these years he used to write these memoirs. They were 
intended for his children, but perhaps even more for himself. They had to 
be written clandestinely, often on scraps of paper or sheets torn from 
rolls used by the prison painters, and hidden behind a book Speer pre- 
tended to be reading as he lay on his cot. They were smuggled out of 
Spandau by one of the prison staff, a Dutchman who had himself been 
a slave laborer. 

Speer, as the reader will discover, is not given to facile self-exculpa- 
tion. When in defeat he finally came face to face with himself, with the 
bitter knowledge of what manner of man and what kind of state he had 
helped survive, he was as unrelenting toward himself as toward his collab- 
orators. He told the court at Nuremberg, knowing that he risked his life 
when he said it, that as a member of Hitler's government he took full re- 
sponsibility for the crimes committed, for the slave labor in the factories 
under his authority, for his collaboration with the SS when it provided con- 
centration camp prisoners for his production lines, and his conspicuous 
role in a regime that killed— although with no direct help from him— six 
million Jews. He had been accused on all four counts of the Nuremberg 
indictment: of having plotted to wage aggressive war, of participating in 
it, and of committing war crimes and crimes against humanity. He fully 
accepted what lay behind the charges— the accusation that was mainly an 
echo of his own conscience— that he had served all too well as Minister of 
Armaments and War Production in a criminal state. 



Introduction ( xiv 

The court found him not guilty on the first two counts. With regard 
to the other charges, a majority (the Russians voted for death) took note 
of extenuating circumstances, on the evidence that Speer had tried to pro- 
vide his workers with adequate food and housing, to make their lot as 
endurable and their work as efficient as possible. The court also noted 
that he had openly opposed Hitler (and indeed had planned to kill him 
when he saw that the Fuehrer was ready to destroy Germany only to 
gain a little more time for himself); and, too, Speer had had the uncom- 
mon courage to protest Hitlers mistaken identification of his own fate 
with that of the country to a Fuehrer who had many a man executed for 
uttering merely defeatist sentiments. 

The court, especially the Russians on it, knew from experience as well 
as from the evidence before them how much Speer had accomplished for 
the Reich. He had kept Germany armed against a world of enemies both 
inside and outside its boundaries. Far more than Goering, he had become 
the second man in the Reich; one English newspaper had even written, 
toward the end of the war, that he was more important to the German 
war effort than Hitler himself. There is truth in this statement. By the 
time of Stalingrad, Hitler s mystique was fading and his decisions becom- 
ing more and more bizarre; it was Speer who kept the war machine run- 
ning in high gear and increasingly productive until 1945. Only when the 
cities lay in ruins and at Hitler's orders the last factories were to be blown 
up did Speer come to suspect what many of his compatriots like Goer- 
deler, Witzleben, and Rudolf Pechel had long known: that a Hitlerian 
victory would have worse consequences for Germany than any defeat. 

In prison Speer set himself the task of finding out why it had taken 
him so long to see the error in the way he had chosen. He put himself 
through a long and careful self -analysis, a process that prison was ideally 
suited to further. He could read almost any nonpolitical books he chose; 
so he turned to psychology, philosophy, and metaphysics, the kind of 
books, he says, he never in the world would have read or thought he had 
had the time to read when he was in civil life. And he could look in- 
ward, ask himself questions as he went over the days of his life, questions 
that a man sometimes asks during or after major crises but that seldom can 
be thoroughly investigated amid the intense preoccupations of making a 
career in the contemporary world. Speer was unhampered by the de- 
mands of such a life; he had gnawing problems, to be sure— the well-being 
of his family and the appalling state of the country he had helped to keep 
at war and thus had helped destroy— but his main preoccupation was to 
try to explain himself to himself. He could do this best by writing it all 
down. In what he said he had nothing to lose. He was condemned and 
sentenced; he had acknowledged his guilt; now it was his job to under- 
stand what he had done and why. So the reader of these memoirs is for- 
tunate: he will be told, as far as the author is capable of telling him, pre- 



xv ) Introduction 

cisely why Speer acted as he did. Thus this chronicle of National Socialist 
Germany seen from within also becomes a self -revealing account of one of 
the most able men who served it. 

Inwardness is especially unusual in a technician. A man like Speer, 
working with blueprints, ordering vast projects, is likely to exhaust him- 
self in manipulation, in transforming the outer world, in carrying out pro- 
duction goals with all the means at hand. His was not introspective work, 
but in Spandau Speer had to turn not to others to carry out his planning, 
but only, day after day and night after night, to himself. It was a rare op- 
portunity and he took full advantage of it. He could do it the more readily 
because he was convinced the court had acted justly in his case; he 
had much the same interest as the prosecution in finding out what had 
happened. 

This objectivity has stayed with him. One of the suggestions made to 
him in connection with the publication of this book in England was that 
he meet the former chief British prosecutor, Lord Shawcross (at the time 
of the trial, Sir Hartley Shawcross), on the BBC to discuss the Nuremberg 
case. Speer said he would be pleased to meet with the British or Amer- 
ican or any other prosecutor; he bears no rancor against the people who 
helped put him in prison for twenty years, and he has no objection to 
meeting anyone who has a serious interest in the history in which he 
played such a conspicuous role. 

When he returned to Heidelberg after his twenty-one-year absence 
he did the simple, ordinary things a man might do who must start all over 
again. He went back to the summer house above the Neckar where he had 
lived as a child; and because when he was a boy he had had a St. Bernard 
dog, he got himself another one, to help him return to the beginnings 
again, to bridge the long exile. He planned to resume his architectural 
practice, although on a very small scale this time. Men take disaster in 
very different ways. Admiral Doenitz, for example, will not discuss Span- 
dau. He says he has put it away in a trunk and doesn't want to talk about 
it. Speer on the other hand talks easily about his imprisonment— more 
than easily: with serenity. 

Of course, motives may remain unrevealed, whatever Speer s earnest 
attempts to seek them out. It is unlikely that any man, despite his good 
intentions, can rid himself entirely of the need to see himself in a better 
light than his critics see him. Hans Frank, a co-defendant of Speer's, wrote 
his memoirs while awaiting execution; it was he who made the often 
quoted remark, "A thousand years shall pass and this guilt of Germany 
will not have been erased." Although disgusted with himself, Frank 
could not avoid telling in his recollections how he had respected 
the law and had tried to get the Fuehrer to respect it too. In this 
and other ways he salvaged what he could from a career he now de- 
plored. Albert Speer may not be entirely immune from this human failing, 



Introduction ( xvi 

but he has no intention of covering up or decorating anything. He put 
his life on the line in the Nuremberg courtroom and he now meets his 
German and foreign critics with calm assurance, with sorrow for the irre- 
trievable mistakes he made but the conviction that he has paid for them 
as far as he could and as far as his judges thought he should. 

Some of his self-discoveries leave him still with ambivalent judg- 
ments. When he first met the Fuehrer, Speer writes, it was at a time in 
his career when, like Faust, he would have gladly sold his soul to the 
devil in exchange for a patron who would make use of his architectural 
services. And something resembling the Faustian pact was made. All his 
energies and abilities Speer eagerly placed at Hitler's disposal, although 
he fought off everyone, including Hitler, who obstructed his single-minded 
drive to do his job. Speer's early admiration for the Fuehrer slowly dimin- 
ished as Hitler became increasingly capricious and unapproachable; when 
Hitler ordered everything blown up, Speer refused to obey him and was 
ready to kill him to prevent the orders from being carried out. Neverthe- 
less, he made a flight to the bunker in Berlin under the guns of the Russian 
planes and troops a few days before Hitler's suicide in order to say 
good-bye. 

Speer has given us two versions of this flight. In an interview pub- 
lished in Der Spiegel just after he was released from Spandau he said he 
went to Berlin to attempt to persuade one of his close collaborators, 
Friedrich Liischen, to leave the city. In these memoirs, however, the story 
is told somewhat differently. Speer writes that he did have Liischen's 
rescue in mind and also wanted to save Dr. Brandt, an old friend and 
Hitler's personal physician, who had fallen into the hands of Himmler's 
SS. In the last stages of his trip to Berlin Speer learned that Brandt was 
no longer in the city and he could not reach Liischen, but he nevertheless 
decided to continue his journey. He knows now that he had to go to Berlin 
to say farewell to the man whom he owed so much and for whom he felt 
such deeply mixed emotions. 

Speer always intends to be as ruthlessly honest in his self-portrait 
as he is in those he draws of others. He has written that even today he is 
glad that he said farewell to the wreck of a man who, when Speer de- 
parted, absent-mindedly gave him a limp hand to shake, without a word 
that spoke of their long association. What made him change his mind 
about the reasons for the flight? I suggest that the change is evidence of 
the continuing reevaluation of his reasons for acting as he did. It seems 
likely that during the interview in Der Spiegel he told reporters what read- 
ily came to mind and that only later, as he reexamined his present f eelings 
in the context of these memoirs, did he see clearly why he had gone to 
Berlin and how even today he is not rid of the spell of the Fuehrer he 
served for so many crowded years. Speer has no prettified self-image to 
protect. His fellow prisoner, von Schirach, who was released from Span- 



xvii ) Introduction 

dau at the same time as Speer, may defend what he takes to be his own 
services to Germany, but Speer bears the full burden of his past and 
attempts to carry out his self-imposed obligation to come to grips with 
whatever he has done no matter what the cost to his self-esteem. So the 
true story emerges, as I think it has, as far as the author is able to re- 
member and comprehend it, throughout these pages. 

This careful self -scrutiny occurs too in connection with his part in the 
treatment of the Jews. Actually Speer played no role whatever in the 
Jew-baiting or in the exterminations. The exterminations were known to 
comparatively few people. Even those most concerned, the Jews in con- 
centration camps, and incredibly, many of those within sight of the gas 
chambers, refused to believe the stories they heard.* The mass killings 
were beyond imagination— they sounded like clumsy propaganda; Speer, 
however, was in a position to find out about them. He tells us that one 
of his friends, Gauleiter Hanke, had visited Auschwitz and warned him 
in the summer of 1944 against making a similar visit. But the Minister 
of Armaments and War Production had no business that required him to 
be concerned with rumors of any death mills; his business was with the 
prisoners who could man his factories, so he never pursued the matter, 
never looked behind the terrible curtain Hanke had pointed out to him. 
He preferred not to know, to turn his face away, to concentrate on his 
own huge task. He believes this was a grievous failure, a sin of omission 
more inexcusable than any crime he may have committed. 

It is for this reason that Speer did not resist his long prison term as 
did, for example, Admiral Doenitz. Doenitz always felt himself unjustly 
convicted; he has a large volume of letters from British and American 
naval officers sharing his view who wrote to him, on their own initiative, 
to protest the Nuremberg court's verdict and his sentence of ten years. 
In Speer's case too, non-Germans, including the three Western governors 
of the prison, had taken the view that he had been given an excessive 
sentence and had recommended a commutation, but the Russians who had 
voted to hang Speer held him to his full term. Speer has no complaint 
to make against the Russians or anyone else. He came to know the 
Russian guards well at Spandau; they exchanged stories about their 
children and families and no one ever mentioned the past. Speer was 
grateful for that; he knew his jailers had undoubtedly lost friends and 
relatives because he had kept the German war machine rolling and that 
they had good reason to be hostile. But they were not hostile; nor was the 

* Two recent publications have dealt with this astonishing incomprehension. 
One, The Destruction of the Dutch Jews, was witten by Jacob Presser, who was him- 
self a concentration camp prisoner. The other is an article by Louis de Jong, director 
of the Dutch Institute of War Documentation; it is entitled "Die Niederlander und 
Auschwitz" and appeared in the January 1969 issue of the Vierteljahrshefte, pub- 
lished by the Inslitut fiir Zeitgeschichte in Munich. 



Introduction ( xviii 

former slave laborer who befriended Speer in prison, because he thought 
Speer had seen to it, in the days of his forced labor, that he be tolerably 
treated. 

It is Speer s spirit of contrition, this complete acknowledgment of so 
much that went wrong, of so much that he feels was lacking in him in his 
days of power, as well as the perceptiveness of his observations, that makes 
this book such an unusual document. It tells us much of how history was 
made, and something too of the moral dilemma of a civilized man 
who had been given an enormous administrative assignment, that at first 
had seemed to him more a technological than a human problem. Much 
of what Speer tells us is related to an old story of hubris, of temptations 
of pride and position, and of the opportunity to create on a heroic scale. 
In the euphoria of history-making activity, unpleasant facts were ignored; 
they were no more than obstacles to the achievement of the grand design. 
But with the collapse of everything he had lived for and lived by, Speer 
came to judge himself more strictly than the Nuremberg court could judge 
him. It is in this long, painful struggle for self -enlightenment that we may 
see that whatever he lost when he made his pact with Adolf Hitler, it was 
not his soul. 

Eugene Davidson 
May 1970 



Every autobiography is a dubious enterprise. 
For the underlying assumption is that a chair 
exists in which a man can sit down to con- 
template his own life, to compare its phases, 
to survey its development, and to penetrate 
its meanings. Every man can and surely 
ought to take stock of himself. But he cannot 
survey himself even in the present moment, 
any more than in the whole of his past, 

Karl Barth 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH 



Foreword 



"I suppose you'll be writing your memoirs now?" said one of the 
first Americans I met in Flensburg in May 1945. Since then twenty-four 
years have passed, of which I spent twenty-one in a prison cell. A long 
time. 

Now I am publishing my memoirs. I have tried to describe the past as 
I experienced it. Many will think it distorted; many will find my perspec- 
tive wrong. That may or may not be so: I have set forth what I experi- 
enced and the way I regard it today. In doing so I have tried not to 
falsify the past. My aim has been not to gloss over either what was fasci- 
nating or what was horrible about those years. Other participants will 
criticize me, but that is unavoidable. I have tried to be honest. 

One of the purposes of these memoirs is to reveal some of the 
premises which almost inevitably led to the disasters in which that period 
culminated. I have sought to show what came of one man's holding unre- 
stricted power in his hands and also to clarify the nature of this man. In 
court at Nuremberg I said that if Hitler had had any friends, I would have 
been his friend. I owe to him the enthusiasms and the glory of my youth 
as well as belated horror and guilt. 

In the description of Hitler as he showed himself to me and to others, 
a good many likable traits will appear. He may seem to be a man capable 
and devoted in many respects. But the more I wrote, the more I felt that 
these were only superficial traits. 

For such impressions are countered by one unforgettable experience: 
the Nuremberg Trial. I shall never forget the account of a Jewish family 
going to their deaths: the husband with his wife and children on the way 
to die are before my eyes to this day. 

In Nuremberg I was sentenced to twenty years imprisonment. The 
military tribunal may have been faulty in summing up history, but it 
attempted to apportion guilt. The penalty, however poorly such penalties 
measure historical responsibility, ended my civil existence. But that scene 
had already laid waste to my life. It has outlasted the verdict of the court. 

January 11, 1969 Albert Speer 



PART 



ONE 



Origins and ^buth 



Some of my forefathers were swabians, some came from poor peas- 
ants of the Westerwald, others from Silesia and Westphalia. They be- 
longed to the great mass of those who live quiet, unnotable lives. There 
was one exception: Hereditary Reich Marshal Count Friedrich Ferdinand 
zu Pappenheim 1 (1702-93), who begot eight sons with my unmarried 
ancestress Humelin. He does not, however, seem to have worried much 
about their welfare. 

Three generations later my grandfather Hermann Hommel, son of a 
poor forester in the Black Forest, had become by the end of his life sole 
owner of one of the largest machine-tool firms in Germany and of a pre- 
cision-instrument factory. In spite of his wealth he lived modestly and 
treated his subordinates well. Hard-working himself, he knew how to let 
others work without interfering. A typical Black Forest brooder, he could 
sit for hours on a bench in the woods without wasting a word. 

My other grandfather, Berthold Speer, became a prosperous architect 
in Dortmund about this same time. He designed many buildings in the 
neoclassical style of the period. Though he died young, he left enough to 
provide for the education of his four sons. The success of both my grand- 
fathers was furthered by the rapid industrialization of Germany which 
began in the second half of the nineteenth century. But then, many per- 
sons who had started out from a better basis did not necessarily flourish. 

My father s mother, prematurely white-haired, inspired in me more 

(3) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 4 

respect than love in my boyhood. She was a serious woman, moored fast 
to simple notions about life and possessing an obstinate energy. She 
dominated everyone around her. 

I came into the world in Mannheim at noon on Sunday, March 19, 
1905. The thunder of a spring storm drowned out the bells of nearby 
Christ Church, as my mother often used to tell me. 

In 1892, at the age of twenty-nine, my father had established his own 
architectural firm. He had since become one of the busiest architects in 
Mannheim, then a booming industrial town. He had acquired a consider- 
able fortune by the time he married the daughter of a prosperous Mainz 
businessman in 1900. 

The upper-middle-class style of our apartment in one of his Mann- 
heim houses was commensurate with my parents' status. It was an im- 
posing house, built around a courtyard guarded by elaborate wrought-iron 
gates. Automobiles would drive into this courtyard and stop in front of a 
flight of stairs which provided a suitable entrance to the richly furnished 
house. But the children— my two brothers and I— had to use the back 
stairs. These were dark, steep, and narrow and ended unimpressively in a 
rear corridor. Children had no business in the elegant, carpeted front hall. 

As children our realm extended from our bedrooms in the rear wing 
to a vast kitchen. We had to pass through the kitchen to enter the elegant 
part of the f ourteen-room apartment. From a vestibule with a sham fire- 
place faced with valuable Delft tiles guests were conducted into a large 
room full of French furniture and Empire upholstery. The glittering 
crystal chandelier particularly is so impressed on my memory that I can 
see it to this day. So is the conservatory, whose appointments my father 
had bought at the Paris World Exhibition in 1900: richly carved Indian 
furniture, hand-embroidered curtains, and a tapestry-covered divan. 
Palms and other exotic plants suggested an exotic world. Here my parents 
had their breakfast and here my father would make ham rolls for us 
children of the kind that were eaten in his native Westphalia. My recollec- 
tion of the adjacent living room has faded, but the paneled, neo-Gothic 
dining room has kept its magic for me. The table could seat more than 
twenty. There my baptism was celebrated; there our family festivals take 
place to this day. 

My mother took great pleasure and pride in seeing to it that we 
belonged socially to the leading families of Mannheim. There were surely 
no more—but no less-thah twenty or thirty households in the city that 
enjoyed comparable luxuries. A large staff of servants helped meet the 
requirements of status. In addition to the cook— whom for obvious reasons 
we children were especially fond of-my parents employed a kitchen maid, 
a chambermaid, a butler frequently, and a chauffeur always, as well as a 
nanny to look after us. The maids wore white caps, black dresses, and 



5 ) Origins and Youth 

white aprons; the butler, purple livery with gilt buttons. The chauffeur 
was dressed most magnificently of all. 

My parents did their best to provide a happy childhood for us. But 
wealth and status— social obligations, the large household, the nanny, and 
the servants— stood in the way of their doing as they wished in this 
respect. To this day I can feel the artificiality and discomfort of that 
world. Moreover, I often had dizzy spells and sometimes fainted. The 
Heidelberg physician whom they consulted, a distinguished professor of 
medicine, diagnosed the cause as "weakness of the vascular nerves/' This 
disability was a considerable psychological burden and early made me 
conscious of the pressure of external conditions. I suffered all the more 
because my playmates and my two brothers were more robust than I, so 
that I felt inferior to them. In their rough and tumble way they often 
made it clear that this was how they thought of me, too. 

An inadequacy often calls forth compensating forces. In any case 
these difficulties made me learn how to adjust better to the world of other 
boys. If I later showed some aptitude in dealing with difficult circum- 
stances and troublesome people, I suspect that the gift can be traced back 
to my boyhood physical weakness. 

When we were taken out by our French governess, we had to be 
nattily dressed, in keeping with our social status. Naturally, we were 
forbidden to play in the city parks, let alone on the street. All we had for 
a playground was our courtyard— not much larger than a few of our 
rooms put together. It was surrounded by the backs of tall apartment 
houses. This yard contained two or three wretched plane trees, starved 
for air, and an ivy-covered wall. A mound of tufa rocks in one corner sug- 
gested a grotto. By early spring a thick layer of soot coated the greenery, 
and whatever we touched was bent on transforming us into dirty, dis- 
reputable big-city children. My favorite playmate, before my school days 
began, was Frieda Allmendinger, the concierge's daughter. The atmos- 
phere of sparse simplicity and the close-knit quality of a family living in 
crowded quarters had a curious attraction for me. 

I attended the primary grades at a distinguished private school where 
the children of leading families were taught reading and writing. After 
this sheltered environment, my first months in the public Oberrealschule 
(high school), amid rowdy fellow pupils, were especially hard for me. I 
had a friend named Quenzer, however, who soon introduced me to all 
sorts of fun and games. He also persuaded me to buy a soccer ball with 
my pocket money. This was a plebeian impulse which horrified my par- 
ents, all the more so since Quenzer came from a poor family. I think it 
was at this time that my bent for statistics first manifested itself. I re- 
corded all the bad marks in the class book in my "Phoenix Calendar for 
Schoolchildren/' and every month counted up who had received the most 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 6 

demerits. No doubt I would not have bothered if I had not had some 
prospect of frequently heading the list. 

The office of my f ather s architectural firm was right next door to our 
apartment. That was where the large renderings for the builders were 
made. Drawings of all sorts were made on a bluish transparent paper 
whose smell is still part and parcel of my memories of that office. My 
fathers buildings were influenced by the neo-Renaissance: they had by- 
passed Jugendstil. Later on, the quieter classicism of Ludwig Hoffmann, 
the influential city architect of Berlin, served him as a model. 

In that office I made my first "work of art" at the age of twelve. A 
birthday present for my father, it was a drawing of a sort of allegorical 
'life clock," in a highly ornamented case complete with Corinthian col- 
umns and intricate scrollwork. I used all the watercolors I could lay 
hands on. With the help of the office employees, I produced a reasonable 
facsimile of an object in Late Empire style. 

Before 1914 my parents kept a touring car for summer use as well as 
a sedan for driving around the city in winter. These automobiles were the 
focus of my technological passions. At the beginning of the war they 
had to be put upon blocks, to spare the tires; but if the chauffeur were 
well disposed to us, we children were allowed to sit at the steering wheel 
in the garage. At such times I experienced the first sensations of technical 
intoxication in a world that was yet scarcely technical. In Spandau prison 
I had to live like a man of the nineteenth century without a radio, tele- 
vision set, telephone, or car and was not even allowed to work the light 
switch myself. After ten years of imprisonment I experienced a similar 
rapture when I was allowed to run an electric floor polisher. 

In 1915 I encountered another product of the technical revolution 
of those decades. One of the zeppelins used in the air raids on London 
was stationed in Mannheim. The captain and his officers were soon fre- 
quent guests in our house. They invited my two brothers and me to tour 
their airship. Ten years old, I stood before that giant product of tech- 
nology, clambered into the motor gondola, made my way through the dim 
mysterious corridors inside the hull, and went into the control gondola. 
When the airship started, toward evening, the captain had it perform a 
neat loop over our house, and the officers waved a sheet they had bor- 
rowed from our mother. Night after night afterward I was in terror that 
the airship would go up in flames, and all my friends would be killed.* 

My imagination dwelt on the war, on the advances and retreats at 
the front, on the suffering of the soldiers. At night we sometimes heard a 
distant rumble from the great battle of attrition at Verdun. With the 
ardent sympathies of childhood, I would often sleep for several nights 
running on the hard floor beside my soft bed in order to be sharing the 
privations of the soldiers at the front. 

* In 1917 heavy losses made it necessary to call off the attacks. 



7 ) Origins and Youth 

We did not escape the food shortages in the city and what was then 
called the turnip winter. We had wealth, but no relatives or acquaintances 
in the countryside. My mother was clever at devising endless new varia- 
tions on turnip dishes, but I was often so hungry that in secret I gradually 
consumed a whole bag of stone-hard dog biscuits left over from peace- 
time. The air raids on Mannheim, which by present-day standards were 
quite innocuous, became more frequent. One small bomb struck a neigh- 
boring house. A new period of my boyhood began. 

Since 1905 we had owned a summer home in the vicinity of Heidel- 
berg. It stood on the slope of a quarry that was said to have supplied the 
stone for the nearby Heidelberg Schloss. Back of the slope rose the hills 
of the Odenwald with hiking paths through the ancient woods. Strip 
clearings provided occasional glimpses of the Neckar Valley. Here every- 
thing was peaceful; we could have a fine garden and vegetables, and the 
neighbor owned a cow. We moved there in the summer of 1918. 

My health soon improved. Every day, even in snowstorms and rain, 
I tramped for three-quarters of an hour to and from school, often at a 
steady run. Bicycles were not available in the straitened early postwar 
period. 

My way to school led me past the clubhouse of a rowing association. 
In 1919 1 became a member and for two years was coxswain of the racing 
fours and eights. In spite of my still frail constitution I soon became one 
of the most diligent oarsmen in the club. At the age of sixteen I advanced 
to stroke in the school shells and took part in several races. For the first 
time I had been seized by ambition and was spurred to performances I 
would not have thought myself capable of. What excited me was more 
the chance to direct the crew by my own rhythm than the prospect of 
winning respect in the small world of oarsmen. 

Most of the time we were defeated, to be sure. But since a team per- 
formance was involved, each individual's flaws could not be weighed. On 
the contrary, a sense of common action arose. There was another benefit 
to such training: the requirement of self -discipline. At the time I despised 
those among my schoolmates who were finding their first pleasures in 
dancing, wine, and cigarettes. 

On my way to school, at the age of seventeen, I met the girl who was 
to become my wife. Falling in love made me more studious, for a year 
later we agreed that we would be married as soon as I completed my uni- 
versity studies. I had long been good at mathematics; but now my marks 
in other subjects also improved, and I became one of the best in the class. 

Our German teacher, an enthusiastic democrat, often read aloud to 
us from the liberal Frankfurter Zeitung. But for this teacher I would have 
remained altogether nonpolitical in school. For we were being educated 
in terms of a conservative bourgeois view of the world. In spite of the 
Revolution which had brought in the Weimar Republic, it was still 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 8 

impressed upon us that the distribution of power in society and the 
traditional authorities were part of the God-given order of things. We 
remained largely untouched by the currents stirring everywhere during 
the early twenties. In school, there could be no criticism of courses or 
subject matter, let alone of the ruling powers in the state. Unconditional 
faith in the authority of the school was required. It never even occurred 
to us to doubt the order of things, for as students we were subjected to the 
dictates of a virtually absolutist system. Moreover, there were no subjects 
such as sociology which might have sharpened our political judgments. 
Even in our senior year, German class assignments called solely for 
essays on literary subjects, which actually prevented us from giving any 
thought to the problems of society. Nor did all these restrictions in 
school impel us to take positions on political events during extracurricular 
activities or outside of school. One decisive point of difference from the 
present was our inability to travel abroad. Even if funds for foreign travel 
had been available, no organizations existed to help young people under- 
take such travel. It seems to me essential to point out these lacks, as a 
result of which a whole generation was without defenses when exposed to 
the new techniques for influencing opinion. 

At home, too, politics were not discussed. This was all the odder 
since my father had been a convinced liberal even before 1914. Every 
morning he waited impatiently for the Frankfurter Zeitung to arrive; 
every week he read the critical magazines Simplicissimus and Jugend. He 
shared the ideas of Friedrich Naumann, who called for social reforms in 
a powerful Germany. After 1923 my father became a follower of Couden- 
hove-Kalergi and zealously advocated his pan-European ideas. Father 
would surely have been glad to talk about politics with me, but I tended 
to dodge such discussions and he did not insist. This political indifference 
was characteristic of the youth of the period, tired and disillusioned as 
they were by a lost war, revolution, and inflation; but it prevented me 
from forming political standards, from setting up categories on which 
political judgments could be based. I was much more inclined to detour 
on my way to school across the park of the Heidelberg Schloss and to 
linger on the terrace looking dreamily at the ruins of the castle and down 
at the old city. This partiality for tumbledown citadels and tangles of 
crooked old streets remained with me and later found expression in my 
passion for collecting landscape paintings, especially the works of the 
Heidelberg Romantics. On the way to the Schloss I sometimes met the 
poet Stefan George, who radiated dignity and pride and a kind of priestli- 
ness. The great religious preachers must have had such an effect upon 
people, for there was something magnetic about him. When my elder 
brother was in his senior year, he was admitted to the Master's inner 
circle. 

Music meant a good deal to me. Up to 1922, 1 was able to hear the 



9 ) Origins and Youth 

young Furtwangler in Mannheim and after him, Erich Kleiber. At that 
time I found Verdi more impressive than Wagner and thought Puccini 
"frightful." On the other hand, I was ravished by a symphony of Rimsky- 
Korsakov and judged Mahler's Fifth Symphony "rather complicated, but 
I liked it." After a visit to the Playhouse, I observed that Georg Kaiser was 
"the most important modern dramatist who in his works wrestles with the 
concept of the value and power of money." And upon seeing Ibsen's The 
Wild Duck, I decided that we could not find the characteristics of the 
leaders of society as other than ridiculous. These people were "farcical," 
I wrote. Romain Holland's novel Jean Chrisiophe heightened my enthusi- 
asm for Beethoven. 2 

It was, therefore, not only in a burst of youthful rebelliousness that I 
found the luxurious life at home not to my liking. There was a more basic 
opposition involved when I turned to what were then the advanced 
writers and looked for friends in a rowing club or in the huts of the Alpine 
Club. The custom in my circles was for a young man to seek his com- 
panions and his future wife in the sheltered class to which his parents 
belonged. But I was drawn to plain, solid artisan families for both. I even 
felt an instinctive sympathy for the extreme left— though this inclination 
never assumed any concrete form. At the time I was allergic to any politi- 
cal commitments. That continued to be so, even though I felt strong 
nationalistic feelings— as for example, at the time of the French occupation 
of the Ruhr in 1923. 

To my amazement my Abitur essay was judged the best in my class. 
Nevertheless I thought, "That's hardly likely for you," when the head of 
the school in his farewell address told the graduates that now "the way to 
highest deeds and honors" was open to us. 

Since I was the best mathematician in the school, I had intended to 
study that subject. But my father presented sound reasons against this 
choice, and I would not have been a mathematician familiar with the 
laws of logic if I had not yielded to his arguments. The profession of 
architecture, which I had been absorbing naturally since my boyhood, 
seemed the obvious choice. I therefore decided, to my father's delight, to 
become an architect, like him and his father before him. 

During my first semester I studied at the Institute of Technology in 
nearby Karlsruhe. Financial reasons dictated this choice, for the inflation 
was growing wilder with each passing day. I had to draw my allowance 
weekly; by the end of the week the fabulous sum had melted away to 
nothing. From the Black Forest where I was on a bicycle tour in the 
middle of September 1923, I wrote: "Very cheap here! Lodgings 400,000 
marks and supper 1,800,000 marks. Milk 250,000 marks a pint." Six weeks 
later, shortly before the end of the inflation, a restaurant dinner cost ten 
to twenty billion marks, and even in the student dining hall over a billion. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 10 

I had to pay between three and four hundred million marks for a theater 
ticket. 

The financial upheaval finally forced my family to sell my deceased 
grandfather's firm and factory to another company at a fraction of its 
value in return for "dollar treasury bills/' Afterward, my monthly allow- 
ance amounted to sixteen dollars—on which I was totally free of cares 
and could live splendidly. 

In the spring of 1924, with the inflation now over, I shifted to the 
Institute of Technology in Munich. Although I remained there until the 
summer of 1925 and Hitler, after his release from prison, was again 
making a stir in the spring of 1925, I took no notice of him. In my long 
letters to my fiancee I wrote only of how I was studying far into the night 
and of our common goal: getting married in three or four years. 

During the holidays my future wife and I with a few fellow students 
frequently went on tramps from shelter to shelter in the Austrian Alps. 
Hard climbs gave us the sense of real achievement. Sometimes, with 
characteristic obstinacy, I managed to convince my fellow hikers not to 
give up a tour we had started on, even in the worst weather— in spite of 
storms, icy rains, and cold, although mists spoiled the view from the peak 
when we finally reached it. Often, from the mountain tops, we looked 
down upon a deep gray layer of cloud over the distant plain. Down there 
lived what to our minds were wretched people; we thought we stood 
high above them in every sense. Young and rather arrogant, we were con- 
vinced that only the finest people went into the mountains. When we 
returned from the peaks to the normal life of the lowlands, I was quite 
confused for a while by the bustle of the cities. 

We also sought "closeness with nature" on trips with our folding 
boats. In those days this sport was still new; the streams were not filled 
with craft of all kinds as they are today. In perfect quiet we floated down 
the rivers, and in the evenings we could pitch our tent at the most 
beautiful spot we could find. This leisurely hiking and boating gave us 
some of that happiness that had been a matter of course to our fore- 
fathers. Even my father had taken a tour on foot and in horse carriages 
from Munich to Naples in 1885. Later, when he would drive through all 
of Europe in his car, he used to speak of that tour as the finest travel 
experience he had ever had. 

Many of our generation sought such contact with nature. This was 
not merely a romantic protest against the narrowness of middle-class life. 
We were also escaping from the demands of a world growing increasingly 
complicated. We felt that the world around us was out of balance. In 
nature, in the mountains and the river valleys, the harmony of Creation 
could still be felt. The more virginal the mountains, the lonelier the river 
valleys, the more they drew us. I did not, however, belong to any youth 
movement, for the group quality of these movements would have negated 
the very isolation we were seeking. 



ii ) Origins and Youth 

In the autumn of 1925, 1 began attending the Institute of Technology 
in Berlin-Charlottenburg, along with a group of Munich students of 
architecture. I wanted Professor Poelzig for my teacher, but he had set 
limits to the number of students in his drafting seminar. Since my talent 
for drawing was inadequate, I was not accepted. In any case, I was 
beginning to doubt that I would ever make a good architect and took this 
verdict without surprise. Next semester Professor Heinrich Tessenow was 
appointed to the institute. He was a champion of the spirit of simple 
craftsmanship in architecture and believed in architectonic expressiveness 
by severely delimited means. "A minimum of pomp is the decisive factor." 
I promptly wrote to my fiancee: 

My new professor is the most remarkable, most clear-headed man I 
have ever met. I am wild about him and am working with great eagerness. 
He is not modern, but in a certain sense more modern than all the others. 
Outwardly he seems unimaginative and sober, just like me, but his build- 
ings have something about them that expresses a profound experience. His 
intelligence is frighteningly acute. I mean to try hard to be admitted to his 
"master school" in a year, and after another year will try to become his 
assistant. Of course all this is wildly optimistic and is merely meant to trace 
what I'd like to do in the best of cases. 

Only half a year after completing my examination I became his 
assistant. In Professor Tessenow I had found my first catalyst— and 
he remained that for me until seven years later when he was replaced 
by a more powerful one. 

I also had great respect for our teacher of the history of architec- 
ture, Professor Daniel Krenkler. An Alsatian by birth, he was a ded- 
icated archaeologist and a highly emotional patriot as well. In the 
course of one lecture he burst into tears while showing us pictures 
of Strassburg Cathedral and had to suspend the lecture. For him I 
delivered a report on Albrecht Haupt's book on Germanic architecture, 
Die Baukunst der Germanen. But at the same time I wrote to my 
fiancee: 

A little racial mixture is always good. And if today we are on the down- 
ward path, it is not because we are a mixed race. For we were already that 
in the Middle Ages when we still had a vigorous germ in us and were 
expanding, when we drove the Slavs out of Prussia, or later transplanted 
European culture to America. We are going downhill because our energies 
have been consumed; it is the same thing that happened in the past to the 
Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans. There is nothing to be done about that. 

The twenties in Berlin were the inspiring backdrop to my student 
years. Many theatrical performances made a deep impression upon me— 
among others Max Reinhardt's staging of A Midsummer Night's Dream, 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 12 

Elisabeth Bergner in Shaw's Saint Joan, Pallenberg in Piscator's version of 
Schweik. But CharelTs lavishly mounted revues also fascinated me. On 
the other hand, I took no pleasure in Cecil B. De Mille's bombastic pomp 
—never suspecting that ten years later I myself would be going his movie 
architecture one better. As a student I thought his films examples of 
"American tastelessness." 

But overshadowing all such impressions was the poverty and unem- 
ployment all around me. Spengler s Decline of the West had convinced 
me that we were living in a period of decay strongly similar to the late 
Roman Empire: inflation, decline of morals, impotence of the German 
Reich. His essay "Prussianism and Socialism" excited me especially be- 
cause of the contempt for luxury and comfort it expressed. On this score, 
Spengler s and Tessenow's doctrines coincided. But my teacher, in con- 
trast to Spengler, saw hope for the future. He took an ironic tone toward 
the "cult of heroes" fashionable at the period. 

Perhaps there are really uncomprehended "super" heroes all around us 
who because of their towering aims and abilities may rightly smile at even 
the greatest of horrors, seeing them as merely incidental. Perhaps, before 
handicraft and the small town can flourish again, there must first come 
something like a rain of brimstone. Perhaps nations which have passed 
through infernos will then be ready for their next age of flowering. 3 

In the summer of 1927, after nine semesters, I passed the architect's 
license examination. The following spring, at twenty-three, I became one 
of the youngest assistants at the institute. In the last year of the war, I 
had gone to a fortuneteller at a fair, and she had prophesied: "You will 
win early fame and retire early." Now I had reason to think of this pre- 
diction; for it seemed evident that if only I wanted to I could some day 
teach at the Institute of Technology like my professor. 

This post as assistant made it possible for me to marry. We did not 
go to Italy for our honeymoon, but took faltboats and tent through the 
solitary, forested chain of lakes in Mecklenburg. We launched our boats 
in Spandau, a few hundred yards from the prison where I would be 
spending twenty years of my life. 



Profession and Vocation 



I VERY NEARLY BECAME AN OFFICIAL COURT ARCHITECT AS EARLY AS 1928. 

Aman Ullah, ruler of the Afghans, wanted to reform his country and 
was hiring young German technicians with that end in view. Joseph 
Brix, Professor of Urban Architecture and Road Building, organized the 
group. It was proposed that I would serve as city planner and architect 
and in addition as teacher of architecture at a technical school which was 
to be founded in Kabul. My wife and I pored over all available books on 
remote Afghanistan. We considered how a style natural to the country 
could be developed out of the simple existing structures, and the pictures 
of wild mountains filled us with dreams of ski tours. Favorable contractual 
conditions were worked out. But no sooner was everything virtually 
settled— the King had just been received with great honors by President 
Hindenburg— than the Afghans overthrew their ruler in a coup d'etat. 

The prospect of continuing to work with Tessenow consoled me. I 
had been having some misgivings anyhow, and I was glad that the fall of 
Aman Ullah removed the need to make a decision. I had to look after my 
seminar only three days a week; in addition there were five months of 
academic vacation. Nevertheless I received 300 Reichsmark— about the 
equivalent in value of 800 Deutsche Mark* [$200] today. Tessenow de- 

* All figures in DM do not take into account the 1969 revaluation of the mark. 
The reader can easily reckon the amounts in U.S. dollars by dividing DM figures 
by four. 

( 13) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 14 

livered no lectures; he came to the large seminar room only to correct the 
papers of his fifty-odd students. He was around for no more than four to 
six hours a week; the rest of the time the students were left in my care for 
instruction and correction. 

The first months in particular were very strenuous for me. The stu- 
dents assumed a highly critical attitude toward me and tried to trap me 
into a show of ignorance or weakness. It took a while before my initial 
nervousness subsided. But the commissions for buildings, which I had 
hoped to spend my ample free time on, did not come my way. Probably I 
struck people as too young. Moreover, the construction industry was very 
slow because of the economic depression. One exception was the commis- 
sion to build a house in Heidelberg for my wife's parents. It proved to be 
a modest building which was followed by two others of no great con- 
sequence-two garage annexes for Wannsee villas— and the designing of 
the Berlin offices of the Academic Exchange Service. 

In 1930 we sailed our two faltboats from Donaueschingen, which is 
in Swabia, down the Danube to Vienna. By the time we returned, there 
had been a Reichstag election on September 14 which remains in my 
memory only because my father was greatly perturbed about it. The 
NSDAP (National Socialist Party) had won 107 seats and was suddenly 
the chief topic of political discussion. 

My father had the darkest forebodings, chiefly in view of the 
NSDAFs socialist tendencies. He was already disturbed enough by 
the strength of the Social Democrats and the Communists. 

Our Institute of Technology had in the meanwhile become a center 
of National Socialist endeavors. The small group of Communist archi- 
tecture students gravitated to Professor Poelzig's seminar, while the Na- 
tional Socialists gathered around Tessenow, even though he was and re- 
mained a forthright opponent of the Hitler movement, for there were 
parallels, unexpressed and unintended, between his doctrine and the ide- 
ology of the National Socialists. Tessenow was not aware of these parallels. 
He would surely have been horrified by the thought of any kinship be- 
tween his ideas and National Socialist views. 

Among other things, Tessenow taught: "Style comes from the people. 
It is in our nature to love our native land. There can be no true culture 
that is international. True culture comes only from the maternal womb 
of a nation." 1 

Hitler, too, denounced the internationalization of art. The National 
Socialist creed held that the roots of renewal were to be found in the 
native soil of Germany. 

Tessenow decried the metropolis and extolled the peasant virtues: 
The metropolis is a dreadful thing. The metropolis is a confusion of old 
and new. The metropolis is conflict, brutal conflict. Everything good 



15 ) Profession and Vocation 

should be left outside of big cities. . . . Where urbanism meets the 
peasantry, the spirit of the peasantry is ruined. A pity that people can no 
longer think in peasant terms." In a similar vein, Hitler cried out against 
the erosion of morals in the big cities. He warned against the ill effects of 
civilization which, he said, damaged the biological substance of the 
people. And he emphasized the importance of a healthy peasantry as a 
mainstay for the state. 

Hitler was able to sense these and other currents which were in the 
air of the times, though many of them were still diffuse and intangible. 
He was able to articulate them and to exploit them for his own ends. 

In the process of my correcting their papers, the National Socialist 
students often involved me in political discussions. Naturally, Tessenow's 
ideas were passionately debated. Well trained in dialectics, these students 
easily crushed the feeble objections I could make, borrowed as they were 
from my father's vocabulary. 

The students were chiefly turning to the extremists for their beliefs, 
and Hitler's party appealed directly to the idealism of this generation. 
And after all, was not a man like Tessenow also fanning these flames? 
About 1931 he had declared: "Someone will have to come along who 
thinks very simply. Thinking today has become too complicated. An un- 
cultured man, a peasant as it were, would solve everything much more 
easily merely because he would still be unspoiled. He would also have 
the strength to carry out his simple ideas." 2 To us this oracular remark 
seemed to herald Hitler. 

Hitler was delivering an address to the students of Berlin University 
and the Institute of Technology. My students urged me to attend. Not yet 
convinced, but already uncertain of my ground, I went along. The site of 
the meeting was a beer hall called the Hasenheide. Dirty walls, narrow 
stairs, and an ill-kept interior created a poverty-stricken atmosphere. This 
was a place where workmen ordinarily held beer parties. The room was 
overcrowded. It seemed as if nearly all the students in Berlin wanted to 
see and hear this man whom his adherents so much admired and his 
opponents so much detested. A large number of professors sat in favored 
places in the middle of a bare platform. Their presence gave the meeting 
an importance and a social acceptability that it would not otherwise have 
had. Our group had also secured good seats on the platform, not far from 
the lectern. 

Hitler entered and was tempestuously hailed by his numerous fol- 
lowers among the students. This enthusiasm in itself made a great im- 
pression upon me. But his appearance also surprised me. On posters and 
in caricatures I had seen him in military tunic, with shoulder straps, 
swastika armband, and hair flapping over his forehead. But here he was 
wearing a well-fitted blue suit and looking markedly respectable. Every- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( l6 

thing about him bore out the note of reasonable modesty. Later I learned 
that he had a great gift for adjusting— consciously or intuitively— to his 
surroundings. 

As the ovation went on for minutes he tried, as if slightly pained, to 
check it. Then, in a low voice, hesitantly and somewhat shyly, he began 
a kind of historical lecture rather than a speech. To me there was some- 
thing engaging about it— all the more so since it ran counter to everything 
the propaganda of his opponents had led me to expect: a hysterical dema- 
gogue, a shrieking and gesticulating fanatic in uniform. He did not allow 
the bursts of applause to tempt him away from his sober tone. 

It seemed as if he were candidly presenting his anxieties about the 
future. His irony was softened by a somewhat self-conscious humor; his 
South German charm reminded me agreeably of my native region. A cool 
Prussian could never have captivated me that way. Hitlers initial shyness 
soon disappeared; at times now his pitch rose. He spoke urgently and with 
hypnotic persuasiveness. The mood he cast was much deeper than the 
speech itself, most of which I did not remember for long. 

Moreover, I was carried on the wave of the enthusiasm which, one 
could almost feel this physically, bore the speaker along from sentence 
to sentence. It swept away any skepticism, any reservations. Opponents 
were given no chance to speak. This furthered the illusion, at least mo- 
mentarily, of unanimity. Finally, Hitler no longer seemed to be speaking 
to convince; rather, he seemed to feel that he was expressing what the 
audience, by now transformed into a single mass, expected of him. It was 
as if it were the most natural thing in the world to lead students and part 
of the faculty of the two greatest academies in Germany submissively by 
a leash. Yet that evening he was not yet the absolute ruler, immune from 
all criticism, but was still exposed to attacks from all directions. 

Others may afterward have discussed that stirring evening over a 
glass of beer. Certainly my students pressed me to do so. But I felt I had 
to straighten things out in my own mind, to master my confusion. I needed 
to be alone. Shaken, I drove off into the night in my small car, stopped in 
a pine forest near the Havel, and went for a long walk. 

Here, it seemed to me, was hope. Here were new ideals, a new un- 
derstanding, new tasks. Even Spengler s dark predictions seemed to me 
refuted, and his prophecy of the coming of a new Roman emperor 
simultaneously fulfilled. The peril of communism, which seemed inexor- 
ably on its way, could be checked, Hitler persuaded us, and instead of 
hopeless unemployment, Germany could move toward economic recovery. 
He had mentioned the Jewish problem only peripherally. But such re- 
marks did not worry me, although I was not an anti-Semite; rather, I 
had Jewish friends from my school days and university days, like virtually 
everyone else. 

A few weeks after this speech, which had been so important to me, 



17 ) Profession and Vocation 

friends took me to a demonstration at the Sportpalast. Goebbels, the 
Gauleiter of Berlin, spoke. How different my impression was: much 
phrase-making, careful structure, and incisive formulations; a roaring 
crowd whom Goebbels whipped up to wilder and wilder frenzies of 
enthusiasm and hatred; a witches' cauldron of excitement such as I had 
hitherto witnessed only at six-day bike races. I felt repelled; the positive 
effect Hitler had had upon me was diminished, though not extinguished. 

Both Goebbels and Hitler had understood how to unleash mass in- 
stincts at their meetings, how to play on the passions that underlay the 
veneer of ordinary respectable life. Practiced demagogues, they succeeded 
in fusing the assembled workers, petits bourgeois, and students into a 
homogeneous mob whose opinions they could mold as they pleased. . . . 
But as I see it today, these politicians in particular were in fact molded 
by the mob itself, guided by its yearnings and its daydreams. Of course 
Goebbels and Hitler knew how to penetrate through to the instincts of 
their audiences; but in the deeper sense they derived their whole existence 
from these audiences. Certainly the masses roared to the beat set by Hit- 
lers and Goebbels's baton; yet they were not the true conductors. The mob 
determined the theme. To compensate for misery, insecurity, unemploy- 
ment, and hopelessness, this anonymous assemblage wallowed for hours 
at a time in obsessions, savagery, license. This was no ardent nationalism. 
Rather, for a few short hours the personal unhappiness caused by the 
breakdown of the economy was replaced by a frenzy that demanded 
victims. And Hitler and Goebbels threw them the victims. By lashing out 
at their opponents and villifying the Jews they gave expression and direc- 
tion to fierce, primal passions. 

The Sportpalast emptied. The crowd moved calmly down Potsdamer 
Strasse. Their self-assurance fed by Goebbels's speech, they challengingly 
took up the whole width of the street, so that automobile traffic and the 
streetcars were blocked. At first the police took no action; perhaps they 
did not want to provoke the crowd. But in the side streets mounted squads 
and trucks with special patrols were held in readiness. At last the mounted 
police rode into the crowd, with raised truncheons, to clear the street. 
Indignantly, I watched the procedure; until that moment I had never 
witnessed such use of force. At the same time I felt a sense of partisanship, 
compounded of sympathy for the crowd and opposition to authority, take 
possession of me. My feelings probably had nothing to do with political 
motives. Actually, nothing extraordinary had happened. There had not 
even been any injuries. 

The following day I applied for membership in the National Socialist 
Party and in January 1931 became Member Number 474,481. 

It was an utterly undramatic decision. Then and ever afterward I 
scarcely felt myself to be a member of a political party. I was not choosing 
the NSDAP, but becoming a follower of Hitler, whose magnetic force had 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( l8 

reached out to me the first time I saw him and had not, thereafter, re- 
leased me. His persuasiveness, the peculiar magic of his by no means 
pleasant voice, the oddity of his rather banal manner, the seductive sim- 
plicity with which he attacked the complexity of our problems— all that 
bewildered and fascinated me. I knew virtually nothing about his pro- 
gram. He had taken hold of me before I had grasped what was happening. 

I was not even thrown off by attending a meeting of the racist 
Kampfbund Deutscher Kultur (League of Struggle for German Culture), 
although I heard many of the aims advocated by our teacher Tessenow 
roundly condemned. One of the speakers called for a return to old- 
fashioned forms and artistic principles; he attacked modernism and finally 
berated Der Ring, the society of architects to which Tessenow, Gropius, 
Mies van der Rohe, Scharoun, Mendelsohn, Taut, Behrens, and Poelzig 
belonged. Thereupon one of our students sent a letter to Hitler in which 
he took exception to this speech and spoke with schoolboyish ardor of our 
admired master. Soon afterward he received a routine letter from party 
headquarters to the effect that National Socialists had the greatest respect 
for the work of Tessenow. We laid great weight on that. However, I did 
not tell Tessenow at the time about my membership in the party.* 

It must have been during these months that my mother saw an SA 
parade in the streets of Heidelberg. The sight of discipline in a time of 
chaos, the impression of energy in an atmosphere of universal hopeless- 
ness, seems to have won her over also. At any rate, without ever having 
heard a speech or read a pamphlet, she joined the party. Both of us seem 
to have felt this decision to be a breach with a liberal family tradition. 
In any case, we concealed it from one another and from my father. Only 
years later, long after I had become part of Hitlers inner circle, did my 
mother and I discover by chance that we shared early membership in the 
party. 

Quite often even the most important step in a mans life, his choice of 
vocation, is taken quite frivolously. He does not bother to find out enough 
about the basis and the various aspects of that vocation. Once he has 
chosen it, he is inclined to switch off his critical awareness and to fit 
himself wholly into the predetermined career. 

My decision to enter Hitler's party was no less frivolous. Why, for 

* After 1933 all the accusations made against Tessenow at this meeting, as well 
as his connection with the publisher Cassirer and his circle, were cited as mcriminat- 
ing. He became politically suspect and was barred from teaching. But thanks to my 
privileged position, I was able to persuade the Minister of Education to have him 
reinstated. He kept his chair at the Berlin Institute of Technology until the end of 
the war. After 1945 his reputation soared; he was elected one of the first rectors of 
Berlin's Technical University. "After 1933, Speer soon became a total stranger to me," 
Tessenow wrote to my wife in 1950, "but I have never thought of him as anything 
but the friendly, good-natured person I used to know." 



ig ) Profession and Vocation 

example, was I willing to abide by the almost hypnotic impression Hitler's 
speech had made upon me? Why did I not undertake a thorough, system- 
atic investigation of, say, the value or worthlessness of the ideologies of 
all the parties? Why did I not read the various party programs, or at least 
Hitlers Mein Kampf and Rosenberg's Myth of the Twentieth Century? 
As an intellectual I might have been expected to collect documentation 
with the same thoroughness and to examine various points of view with 
the same lack of bias that I had learned to apply to my preliminary archi- 
tectural studies. This failure was rooted in my inadequate political school- 
ing. As a result, I remained uncritical, unable to deal with the arguments 
of my student friends, who were predominantly indoctrinated with the 
National Socialist ideology. 

For had I only wanted to, I could have found out even then that 
Hitler was proclaiming expansion of the Reich to the east; that he was a 
rank anti-Semite; that he was committed to a system of authoritarian 
rule; that after attaining power he intended to eliminate democratic pro- 
cedures and would thereafter yield only to force. Not to have worked 
that out for myself; not, given my education, to have read books, maga- 
zines, and newspapers of various viewpoints; not to have tried to see 
through the whole apparatus of mystification— was already criminal. At 
this initial stage my guilt was as grave as, at the end, my work for Hitler. 
For being in a position to know and nevertheless shunning knowledge 
creates direct responsibility for the consequences— from the very begin- 
ning. 

I did see quite a number of rough spots in the party doctrines. But I 
assumed that they would be polished in time, as has often happened in 
the history of other revolutions. The crucial fact appeared to me to be 
that I personally had to choose between a future Communist Germany 
or a future National Socialist Germany since the political center between 
these antipodes had melted away. Moreover, in 1931, I had some reason 
to feel that Hitler was moving in a moderate direction. I did not realize 
that there were opportunistic reasons for this. Hitler was trying to ap- 
pear respectable in order to seem qualified to enter the government. The 
party at that time was confining itself— as far as I can recall today— to 
denouncing what it called the excessive influence of the Jews upon vari- 
ous spheres of cultural and economic life. It was demanding that their 
participation in these various areas be reduced to a level consonant with 
their percentage of the population. Moreover, Hitler's alliance with the 
old-style nationalists of the Harzburg Front led me to think that a con- 
tradiction could be detected between his statements at public meetings 
and his political views. I regarded this contradiction as highly promising. 
In actuality Hitler only wanted to thrust his way to power by whatever 
means he could. 

Even after joining the party I continued to associate with Jewish 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 20 

acquaintances, who for their part did not break relations with me although 
they knew or suspected that I belonged to this anti-Semitic organization. 
At that time I was no more an anti-Semite than I became in the following 
years. In none of my speeches, letters, or actions is there any trace of anti- 
Semitic feelings or phraseology. 

Had Hitler announced, before 1933, that a few years later he would 
burn down Jewish synagogues, involve Germany in a war, and kill Jews 
and his political opponents, he would at one blow have lost me and proba- 
bly most of the adherents he wonafter 1930. Goebbels had realized that, 
for on November 2, 1931, he wrote an editorial in the Angriff entitled "Sep- 
temberlings" concerning the host of new members who joined the party 
after the September election of 1930. In this editorial he warned the party 
against the infiltration of more bourgeois intellectuals who came from 
the propertied and educated classes and were not as trustworthy as the 
Old Fighters. In character and principles, he maintained, they stood 
abysmally far below the good old party comrades, but they were far 
ahead in intellectual skills: "They are of the opinion that the Movement 
has been brought to greatness by the talk of mere demagogues and are 
now prepared to take it over themselves and provide it with leadership 
and expertise. That's what they think!" 

In making this decision to join the accursed party, I had for the first 
time denied my own past, my upper-middle-class origins, and my pre- 
vious environment. Far more than I suspected, the "time of decision" was 
already past for me. I felt, in Martin Buber's phrase, "anchored in respon- 
sibility in a party." My inclination to be relieved of having to think, 
particularly about unpleasant facts, helped to sway the balance. In this 
I did not differ from millions of others. Such mental slackness above all 
facilitated, established, and finally assured the success of the National 
Socialist system. And I thought that by paying my party dues of a few 
marks a month I had settled with my political obligations. 

How incalculable the consequences were! 

The superficiality of my attitude made the fundamental error all the 
worse. By entering Hitler's party I had already, in essence, assumed a 
responsibility that led directly to the brutalities of forced labor, to the 
destruction of war, and to the deaths of those millions of so-called un- 
desirable stock— to the crushing of justice and the elevation of every evil. 
In 1931 I had no idea that fourteen years later I would have to answer 
for a host of crimes to which I subscribed beforehand by entering the 
party. I did not yet know that I would atone with twenty-one years of my 
life for frivolity and thoughtlessness and breaking with tradition. Still, I 
will never be rid of that sin. 



3 

Junction 



I WOULD BE GIVING A MORE ACCURATE PICTURE OF THOSE YEARS IF I WERE 

to speak chiefly of my professional life, my family, and my inclinations. 
For my new political interests played a subsidiary part in my thinking. I 
was above all an architect. 

As owner of a car I became a member of the newly founded Motorists 
Association of the National Socialist Party (NSKK), and since it was a 
new organization I promptly started as head of the Wannsee Section— 
Wannsee was the Berlin suburb where we lived. For the time being, any 
serious political activity for the party was far from my thoughts. I was, 
incidentally, the only member in Wannsee, and therefore in my section, 
who had a car; the other members only expected to have one after the 
"revolution" they dreamed of took place. By way of preparation they 
were finding out where in that rich suburb the right cars were available 
for X Day. 

This party office sometimes led to my calling at Kreisleitung West 
(District Headquarters of the West End), which was headed by an un- 
complicated but intelligent and highly energetic young journeyman miller 
named Karl Hanke. He had just leased a villa in elegant Grunewald as 
the future quarters for his district organization. For after its success in the 
elections of September 14, 1930, the party was trying hard to establish its 
respectability. He offered me the job of redecorating the villa— naturally 
without fee. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 22 

We conferred on wallpapers, draperies, and paints. The young dis- 
trict leader chose Bauhaus wallpapers at my suggestion, although I had 
hinted that these were "Communistic" wallpapers. He waved that warn- 
ing aside with a grand gesture: "We will take the best of everything, even 
from the Communists." In saying this he was expressing what Hitler and 
his staff had already been doing for years: picking up anything that 
promised success without regard for ideology— in fact, determining even 
ideological questions by their effect upon the voters. 

I had the vestibule painted bright red and the offices a strong yellow, 
further sparked by scarlet window hangings. For me this work was the 
fulfillment of a long unrealized urge to try my hand at practical architec- 
ture, and no doubt I wanted to express a revolutionary spirit. But my 
decor met with a divided reception. 

Early in 1932 the salaries of professors' assistants were reduced— a 
small gesture toward balancing the strained budget of the State of Prus- 
sia. Sizable building projects were nowhere in sight; the economic situ- 
ation was hopeless. Three years of working as an assistant were enough 
for us. My wife and I decided that I would give up my post with Tessenow 
and we would move to Mannheim. I would manage the buildings owned 
by my family and that would give us financial security and allow me to 
start seriously on my career as an architect, which so far had been dis- 
tinctly inglorious. 

In Mannheim I sent innumerable letters to the companies in the 
vicinity and to my fathers business friends offering my services as an 
"independent architect." But of course I waited in vain for a builder 
who was willing to engage a twenty-six-year-old architect. Even well- 
established architects in Mannheim were not getting any commissions in 
those times. By entering prize competitions I tried to attract some atten- 
tion to myself. But I did no better than win third prizes and have a few of 
my plans purchased. Rebuilding a store in one of my parents' buildings 
was my sole architectural activity in this dreary period. 

The party here was marked by the easygoing atmosphere typical of 
Baden. After the exciting party affairs in Berlin, into which I had grad- 
ually been drawn, I felt in Mannheim as if I were a member of a bowling 
club. There was no Motorists Association, so Berlin assigned me to the 
Motorized SS. At the time I thought that meant I was a member, but 
apparently I was only a guest; for in 1942 when I wanted to renew my 
membership it turned out that I had not belonged to the Motorized SS 
at all. 

When the preparations for the election of July 31, 1932, started, my 
wife and I went to Berlin in order to feel a little of the exciting election 
atmosphere and— if possible— to help somewhat. For the persistent stag- 
nation of my professional life had greatly intensified my interest, or what 
I thought was that, in politics. I wanted to do my bit to contribute to 



23 ) Junction 

Hitler's electoral victory. This stay in Berlin was meant to be merely a 
few days' break, for from there we planned to go on to make a long- 
planned faltboat tour of the East Prussian lakes. 

I reported along with my car to my NSKK chief of the Berlin Kreis- 
leitung West, Will Nagel, who used me for courier duty to a wide variety 
of local party headquarters. When I had to drive into the parts of the 
city dominated by the "Reds," I often felt distinctly uncomfortable. In 
those areas, Nazi bands were quartered in cellar apartments that rather 
resembled holes in the ground and were subject to a good deal of har- 
rassment. The Communist outposts in the areas dominated by the Nazis 
were in a similar situation. I cannot forget the careworn and anxious 
face of a troop leader in the heart of Moabit, one of the most dangerous 
areas at the time. These people were risking their lives and sacrificing 
their health for an idea, never imagining that they were being exploited 
in behalf of the fantastic notions of a power-hungry man. 

On July 27, 1932, Hitler was to arrive at the Berlin-Staaken airport 
from a morning meeting in Eberswalde. I was assigned to drive a courier 
from Staaken to the site of the next meeting, the Brandenburg Stadium. 
The three-motored plane rolled to a stop. Hitler and several of his associ- 
ates and adjutants got out. Aside from myself and the courier, there was 
scarcely anyone at the airport. I kept at a respectful distance, but I saw 
Hitler reproving one of his companions because the cars had not yet 
arrived. He paced back and forth angrily, slashing at the tops of his high 
boots with a dog whip and giving the general impression of a cross, un- 
controlled man who treats his associates contemptuously. 

This Hitler was very different from the man of calm and civilized 
manner who had so impressed me at the student meeting. Although I did 
not give much thought to it, what I was seeing was an example of Hitler's 
remarkable duplicity— indeed, "multiplicity" would be a better word. 
With enormous histrionic intuition he could shape his behavior to chang- 
ing situations in public while letting himself go with his intimates, ser- 
vants, or adjutants. 

The cars came. I took my passenger into my rattling roadster and 
drove at top speed a few minutes ahead of Hitler's motorcade. In Branden- 
burg the sidewalks close to the stadium were occupied by Social Demo- 
crats and Communists. With my passenger wearing the party uniform, the 
temper of the crowd grew ugly. When Hitler with his entourage arrived 
a few minutes later, the demonstrators overflowed into the street. Hitler's 
car had to force its way through at a snail's pace. Hitler stood erect beside 
the driver. At that time I felt respect for his courage, and still do. The 
negative impression that his behavior at the airport had made upon me 
was wiped out by this scene. 

I waited outside the stadium with my car. Consequently I did not 
hear the speech, only the storms of applause that interrupted Hitler for 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 24 

minutes at a time. When the party anthem indicated the end, we started 
out again. For that day Hitler was speaking at still a third meeting in the 
Berlin Stadium. Here, too, the stands were jammed. Thousands who had 
not been able to obtain admission stood outside in the streets. For hours 
the crowd waited patiently; once more Hitler was very late. My report to 
Hanke that Hitler was on his way was promptly announced over the loud- 
speaker. A roar of applause burst out— incidentally the first and only 
applause that I myself was ever the cause of. 

The following day decided my future. The faltboats were already at 
the railroad station and our tickets to East Prussia purchased. We were 
planning to take the evening train. But at noon I received a telephone 
call. NSKK Chief Nagel informed me that Hanke, who had now risen to 
organization leader of the Berlin District, wanted to see me. 

Hanke received me joyfully. Tve been looking everywhere for you. 
Would you like to rebuild our new district headquarters?" he asked as 
soon as I entered. 'Til propose it to the Doctor* today. We're in a great 
hurry. ,, 

A few hours later I would have been sitting in the train and on the 
lonely East Prussian lakes would have been out of reach for weeks. The 
district would have had to find another architect. For years I regarded 
this coincidence as the luckiest turning point in my life. I had reached 
the junction. 

Two decades later, in Spandau, I read in Sir James Jeans: 

The course of a railway train is uniquely prescribed for it at most points 
of its journey by the rails on which it runs. Here and there, however, it 
comes to a junction at which alternative courses are open to it, and it may 
be turned on to one or the other by the quite negligible expenditure of 
energy involved in moving the points. 

The new district headquarters was situated on imposing Voss Strasse, 
cheek by jowl with the legations of the German states. From the rear 
windows I could see eighty-five-year-old President von Hindenburg stroll- 
ing in the adjacent park, often in the company of politicians or military 
men. As Hanke said to me, even in visual terms the party wanted to ad- 
vance to the immediate vicinity of political power and thus make a politi- 
cal impression. My assignment was not so impressive; once again it came 
down to repainting the walls and making minor alterations. The furnish- 
ing of a conference room and the Gauleiter's office likewise turned out to 
be a fairly plain affair, partly for lack of funds, partly because I was still 
under Tessenow's influence. But this modesty was offset by the ornate 
carved woods and molded plaster of the Griinderzeit, the boom period 

This was how Goebbels was always referred to in party circles. The party 
simply did not have many doctors of philosophy among its members in those days. 



25 ) Junction 

of the early eighteen-seventies. I worked day and night because the dis- 
trict was anxious to have the place ready as soon as possible. I seldom 
saw Gauleiter Goebbels. The campaign for the forthcoming elections of 
November 6, 1932, was taking up all his time. Harried and hoarse, he 
deigned to be shown the rooms several times, but without evincing much 
interest. 

The renovations were finished, the estimate of costs far exceeded, 
and the election was lost. Membership shrank; the treasurer wrung his 
hands over the unpaid bills. To the workmen he could show only his 
empty cashbox. As party members they had to consent to wait for their 
pay, in order not to bankrupt the party. 

A few days after the dedication Hitler also inspected the district 
headquarters, which was named after him. I heard that he liked what he 
saw, which filled me with pride, although I was not sure whether he had 
praised the architectural simplicity I had striven for or the ornateness of 
the original Wilhelmine structure. 

Soon afterward I returned to my Mannheim office. Nothing had 
changed; the economic situation and therefore the prospect of commis- 
sions had grown worse, if anything. Political conditions were becoming 
even more confused. One crisis followed on the heels of another, and we 
paid no attention. For us, things went on as before. On January 30, 1933, 
I read of Hitler's appointment as Chancellor, but for the time being that 
did not affect me. Shortly afterward I attended a membership meeting 
of the Mannheim local party group. I was struck by the low personal and 
intellectual level of the members. "A country cannot be governed by such 
people," I briefly thought. My concern was needless. The old bureaucratic 
apparatus continued to run the affairs of state smoothly under Hitler, 
too.* 

Then came the election of March 5, 1933, and a week later I received 
a telephone call from District Organization Leader Hanke in Berlin: 

* Particularly in the early years Hitler achieved his successes largely by using 
the existing organizations that he had taken over. In the administrative bureaucracy 
the old civil servants carried on as before. Hitler found his military leaders among 
the elite of the old Imperial Army and the Reichswehr. Practical matters concerning 
labor were still partially in the hands of the old union officials. And later, of course 
(after I introduced the principle of industrial self-responsibility), the directors who 
helped to achieve the extraordinary increase in armaments production from 1942 
on were ones who had already made names for themselves before 1933. Significantly, 
great successes resulted from combining these old, proven organizations and carefully 
selected officials from them with Hitler's new system. But undoubtedly this harmon- 
ious phase would have been only transitional. After a generation at most, the old 
leadership would have been replaced by a new one trained in Adolf Hitler Schools 
and Ordensburgen [Order Castles, special training schools for Nazi leaders] according 
to the new educational principles. Even in party circles the products of such schools 
were occasionally regarded as too ruthless and arrogant. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 26 

"Would you come to Berlin? There is certainly work for you here. When 
can you come?" he asked. I had the oil changed in our small BMW sports 
car, packed a suitcase, and we drove all night to Berlin. On little sleep, 
I called on Hanke at headquarters in the morning. "You're to drive over 
with the Doctor right away. He wants to have a look at his new Ministry." 

The result was that I made a ceremonial entrance along with Goeb- 
bels into the handsome building on Wilhelmsplatz, the work of the well- 
known nineteenth-century architect Karl Friedrich Schinkel. A few 
hundred people who were waiting there for something, perhaps for Hitler, 
waved to the new Minister of Propaganda. I felt— and not only here— that 
new life had been infused into Berlin. After the long crisis people seemed 
more vigorous and hopeful. Everyone knew that this time more than 
another of the usual cabinet shifts was involved. Everyone seemed to 
sense that an hour of decision had arrived. Groups of people stood around 
in the streets. Strangers exchanged commonplaces, laughed with one 
another, or expressed approval of the political events— while somewhere, 
unnoticed, the party machinery was relentlessly settling accounts with 
the opponents of years of political struggles, and hundreds of thousands 
of people were trembling because of their descent, their religion, or their 
convictions. 

After inspecting the Ministry, Goebbels commissioned me to rebuild 
it and to furnish various important rooms, such as his office and the 
meeting halls. He gave me a formal assignment to begin at once, without 
waiting for an estimate of costs and without troubling to find out whether 
funds were available. That was, as subsequently developed, rather auto- 
cratic, for no appropriations had yet been made for the newly created 
Propaganda Ministry, let alone for these renovations. I tried to carry out 
my assignment with due deference for Schinkers interior. But Goebbels 
thought what I had done insufficiently impressive. After some months he 
commissioned the Vereinigte Werkstatten (United Workshops) in Munich 
to redo the rooms in "ocean-liner style." 

Hanke had secured the influential post of "Minister's Secretary" in 
the Ministry and ruled over the new minister s anterooms with great 
skill. I happened to see a sketch on his desk of the decorations for the 
night rally that was to be held at Tempelhof Field on May 1. The designs 
outraged both my revolutionary and my architectural feelings. "Those look 
like the decorations for a rifle club meet," I exclaimed. Hanke replied: 'If 
you can do better, go to it." 

That same night I sketched a large platform and behind it three 
mighty banners, each of them taller than a ten-story building, stretched 
between wooden struts: two of the banners would be black- white-Ted 
with the swastika banner between them. (A rather risky idea, for in a 
strong wind those banners would act like sails.) They were to be illumi- 
nated by powerful searchlights. The sketch was accepted immediately, 
and once more I had moved a step ahead. 



27 ) Junction 

Full of pride, I showed my drawings to Tessenow. But he remained 
fixed in his ideal of solid craftsmanship. "Do you think you have created 
something? It's showy, that's all.** But Hitler, as Hanke told me, was 
enthusiastic about the arrangement— although Goebbels claimed the idea 
for himself. 

A few weeks later Goebbels moved into the official residence of the 
Minister of Nutrition. He took possession of it more or less by force, for 
Hugenberg insisted that it ought to remain at his disposal, the portfolio 
of Minister of Nutrition being then assigned to his German Nationalist 
Party. But this dispute soon ended, for Hugenberg left the cabinet on 
June 26. 

I was given the assignment to redo the minister's house and also to 
add a large hall. Somewhat recklessly I promised to have house and annex 
ready within two months. Hitler did not believe it would be possible to 
keep this deadline, and Goebbels, in order to spur me on, told me of his 
doubts. Day and night I kept three shifts at work. I took care that various 
aspects of the construction were synchronized down to the smallest detail, 
and in the last few days I set a large drying apparatus to work. The 
building was finally handed over, furnished, punctually on the promised 
date. 

To decorate the Goebbels house I borrowed a few watercolors by 
Nolde from Eberhard Hanfstaengl, the director of the Berlin National 
Gallery. Goebbels and his wife were delighted with the paintings— until 
Hitler came to inspect and expressed his severe disapproval. Then the 
Minister summoned me immediately: "The pictures have to go at once; 
they're simply impossible!" 

During those early months after the taking of power, a few, at least, 
of the schools of modern painting, which in 1937 were to be branded as 
"degenerate" along with the rest, still had a fighting chance. For Hans 
Weidemann, an old party member from Essen who wore the gold party 
badge, headed the Art Section in the Propaganda Ministry. Knowing 
nothing about this episode with Nolde's watercolors, he assembled an 
exhibition of pictures more or less of the Nolde-Munch school and recom- 
mended them to the Minister as samples of revolutionary, nationalist art. 
Goebbels, having learned better, had the compromising paintings removed 
at once. When Weidemann refused to go along with this total repudiation 
of modernity, he was reassigned to some lesser job within the Ministry. 
At the time this conjunction of power and servility on Goebbels's part 
struck me as weird. There was something fantastic about the absolute 
authority Hitler could assert over his closest associates of many years, 
even in matters of taste. Goebbels had simply groveled before Hitler. We 
were all in the same boat. I too, though altogether at home in modern art, 
tacitly accepted Hitler's pronouncement. 

No sooner had I finished the assignment for Goebbels than I was 
summoned to Nuremberg. That was in July 1933. Preparations were being 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 2& 

made there for the first Party Rally of what was now the government 
party. The victorious spirit of the party was to be expressed even in the 
architecture of the background, but the local architect had been unable 
to come up with satisfactory suggestions. I was taken to Nuremberg by 
plane and there made my sketches. They were not exactly overflowing 
with fresh ideas, for in fact they resembled the design for May 1. Instead 
of my great banners I provided a gigantic eagle, over a hundred feet in 
wingspread, to crown the Zeppelin Field. I spiked it to a timber frame- 
work like a butterfly in a collection. 

The Nuremberg organization leader did not dare to decide on this 
matter by himself, and therefore sent me to headquarters in Munich. I 
had a letter of introduction with me, since I was still completely unknown 
outside of Berlin. It seemed that headquarters took architecture, or rather 
festival decor, with extraordinary seriousness. A few minutes after my 
arrival I stood in Rudolf Hess's luxuriously appointed office, my folder of 
drawings in my hand. He did not give me a chance to speak. "Only the 
Fuehrer himself can decide this sort of thing." He made a brief telephone 
call and then said: "The Fuehrer is in his apartment. Ill have you driven 
over there." For the first time I had an intimation of what the magic 
word "architecture" meant under Hitler. 

We stopped at an apartment house in the vicinity of the Prinzre- 
genten Theater. Two flights up I was admitted to an anteroom contain- 
ing mementos or presents of low quality. The furniture, too, testified to 
poor taste. An adjutant came in, opened a door, said casually, "Go in," 
and I stood before Hitler, the mighty Chancellor of the Reich. On a table 
in front of him lay a pistol that had been taken apart; he seemed to have 
been cleaning it. "Put the drawings here," he said curtly. Without looking 
at me, he pushed the parts of the pistol aside and examined my sketches 
with interest but without a word. "Agreed." No more. Since he turned 
to his pistol again, I left the room in some confusion. 

There was astonishment in Nuremberg when I reported that I had 
received the approval from Hitler in person. Had the organizers there 
known how spellbound Hitler was by any drawing, a large delegation 
would have gone to Munich and I would at best have been allowed to 
stand at the very back of the group. But in those days few people were 
acquainted with Hitler's hobby. 

In the autumn of 1933 Hitler commissioned his Munich architect, 
Paul Ludwig Troost, who had designed the fittings for the ocean liner 
Europa and rebuilt the Brown House, to completely redo and refurnish 
the Chancellor s residence in Berlin. The job was to be completed as 
quickly as possible. Troost's building supervisor came from Munich and 
was thus not familiar with Berlin construction firms and practices. Hitler 
then recollected that a young architect had finished an annex for Goebbels 



29 ) Junction 

in a remarkably brief time. He assigned me as an aide to the Munich 
supervisor; I was to choose the firms, to guide him through the mazes of 
the Berlin construction market, and to intervene wherever needed in the 
interests of speed. 

This collaboration began with a careful inspection of the Chancel- 
lor's residence by Hitler, his building supervisor, and myself. In the spring 
of 1939, six years later, in an article on the previous condition of the 
place, Hitler wrote: 

After the 1918 Revolution the building gradually began to decay. 
Large parts of the roof timbers were rotted and the attics completely dilapi- 
dated. . . . Since my predecessors in general could count upon a term of 
office of only three to five months, they saw no reason to remove the filth 
of those who had occupied the house before them nor to see to it that 
those who came after would have better conditions than they themselves. 
They had no prestige to maintain toward foreign countries since these in 
any case took little notice of them. As a result the building was in a state of 
utter neglect. Ceilings and floors were moldy, wallpaper and floors rotting, 
the whole place filled with an almost unbearable smell. 1 

That was certainly exaggerated. Still, the condition of this residence 
was almost incredible. The kitchen had little light and was equipped 
with long-outmoded stoves. There was only one bathroom for all the in- 
habitants, and its fixtures dated from the turn of the century. There were 
also innumerable examples of bad taste: doors painted to imitate natural 
wood and marble urns for flowers which were actually only marbleized 
sheet-metal basins. Hitler exclaimed triumphantly: "Here you see the 
whole corruption of the old Republic. One can't even show the Chancel- 
lor's residence to a foreigner. I would be embarrassed to receive even a 
single visitor here." 

During this thorough tour, which lasted perhaps three hours, we 
also went into the attic. The janitor explained: "And this is the door that 
leads to the next building." 

"What do you mean?" 

"There's a passage running through the attics of all the ministries as 
far as the Hotel Adlon." 

"Why?" 

"During the riots at the beginning of the Weimar Republic it turned 
out that the rioters could besiege the residence and cut the Chancellor 
off from the outside world. The passage was created so that in an emer- 
gency he could clear out." 

Hitler had the door opened, and sure enough, we could walk into 
the adjacent Foreign Office. "Have the door walled up," he said. "We 
don t need anything like that." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 30 

After the repairs had begun, Hitler came to the site at noon almost 
every day, followed by an adjutant. He studied the progress that had 
been made and took pleasure in the rooms as they came into being. Soon 
the band of construction workers were greeting him in a friendly and 
easy way. In spite of the two SS men in civilian dress who stood unob- 
trusively in the background, these scenes had an idyllic air. You could 
see from Hitler s behavior that he felt "at home" amid construction. Yet 
he avoided any cheap popularity-chasing. 

The supervisor and I accompanied him on these tours. In a terse but 
not unfriendly manner, he addressed his questions to us: "When is this 
room to be plastered? . . . When are the windows coming? . . . Have the 
detail drawings arrived from Munich? Not yet? Ill ask the Professor [that 
was the way he usually referred to Troost] about them myself." Another 
room was inspected: "Ah, this has already been plastered. That hadn't 
been done yesterday. Why, this ceiling molding is very handsome. The 
Professor does that sort of thing wonderfully. . . . When do you think 
you'll be finished? I'm in a great hurry. All I have now is the small state 
secretary's apartment on the top floor. I can't invite anyone there. It's 
ridiculous, how penny-pinching the Republic was. Have you seen the 
entrance? And the elevator? Any department store has a better one." The 
elevator in fact would get stuck from time to time and was rated for only 
three persons. 

That was the tone Hitler took. It is easy to imagine how this natural- 
ness of his impressed me— after all, he was not only the Chancellor but 
also the man who was beginning to revive everything in Germany, who 
was providing work for the unemployed and launching vast economic 
programs. Only much later, and on the basis of tiny clues, did I begin to 
perceive that a good measure of propagandist calculation underlay all this 
simplicity. 

I had already accompanied him some twenty or thirty times when 
he suddenly invited me, in the course of a tour: "Will you come to dinner 
with me today?" Naturally this unexpected gesture made me happy-all 
the more so since I had never expected it, because of his impersonal 
manner. 

I was used to clambering around building sites, but that particular 
day I unluckily had a hod of plaster fall on me from a scaffolding. I must 
have looked at my stained jacket with a rueful expression, for Hitler com- 
mented: "Just come along; we'll fix that upstairs." 

In his apartment the guests were already waiting, among them 
Goebbels, who looked quite surprised to see me appear in this circle. 
Hitler took me into his private rooms. His valet was sent off for Hitler s 
own dark-blue jacket. "There, wear that for the while." And so I entered 
the dining room behind Hitler and sat at his side, favored above all the 
other guests. Evidently he had taken a liking to me. Goebbels noticed 



31 ) Junction 

something that had entirely escaped me in my excitement. 'Why, you re 
wearing the Fuehrers badge.* That isn't your jacket, then?" Hitler spared 
me the reply: "No, it's mine." 

On this occasion Hitler for the first time addressed a few personal 
questions to me. Only now did he discover that I had designed the May 1 
decorations. "I see, and you did the ones in Nuremberg too? There was 
an architect who came to see me with the plans! Right, that was you! . . . 
I never would have thought you could have got Goebbels's building fin- 
ished by the deadline." He did not ask about my membership in the party. 
In the case of artists, it seemed to me, he did not care one way or the other. 
Instead of political questions, he wanted to find out as much as possible 
about my origins, my career as an architect, and my father s and grand- 
father s buildings. 

Years later Hitler referred to this invitation: 

You attracted my notice during our rounds. I was looking for an archi- 
tect to whom I could entrust my building plans. I wanted someone young; 
for as you know these plans extend far into the future. I need someone who 
will be able to continue after my death with the authority I have conferred 
on him. I saw you as that man. 

After years of frustrated efforts I was wild to accomplish things— 
and twenty-eight years old. For the commission to do a great building, I 
would have sold my soul like Faust. Now I had found my Mephistopheles. 
He seemed no less engaging than Goethe's. 

* Hitler was the only party member to wear a gold "badge of sovereignty"— an 
eagle with a swastika in its talons. Everyone else wore the round party badge. But 
Hitler's jacket did not differ from ordinary civilian jackets. 



4 

My Catalyst 



I WAS BY NATURE HARDWORKING, BUT I ALWAYS NEEDED A SPECIAL IMPULSE 

to develop new talents and rally fresh energy. Now I had found my 
catalyst; I could not have encountered a more effective one. At an ever 
quickening pace and with ever greater urgency, all my powers were 
summoned forth. 

In responding to this challenge I gave up the real center of my life: 
my family. Completely under the sway of Hitler, I was henceforth 
possessed by my work. Nothing else mattered. Hitler knew how to drive 
his associates to the greatest efforts. "The higher he aims, the more a man 
grows," he would say. 

During the twenty years I spent in Spandau prison I often asked my- 
self what I would have done if I had recognized Hitlers real face and 
the true nature of the regime he had established. The answer was banal 
and dispiriting: My position as Hitlers architect had soon become indis- 
pensable to me. Not yet thirty, I saw before me the most exciting pros- 
pects an architect can dream of. 

Moreover, the intensity with which I went at my work repressed 
problems that I ought to have faced. A good many perplexities were 
smothered by the daily rush. In writing these memoirs I became increas- 
ingly astonished to realize that before 1944 I so rarely— in fact almost 
never— found the time to reflect about myself or my own activities, that I 
never gave my own existence a thought. Today, in retrospect, I often have 

(3*) 



33 ) My Catalyst 

the feeling that something swooped me up off the ground at the time, 
wrenched me from all my roots, and beamed a host of alien forces upon 
me. 

In retrospect, what perhaps troubles me most is that my occasional 
spells of uneasiness during this period were concerned mainly with the 
direction I was taking as an architect, with my growing estrangement 
from Tessenow's doctrines. On the other hand I must have had the feeling 
that it was no affair of mine when I heard the people around me de- 
claring an open season on Jews, Freemasons, Social Democrats, or Jeho- 
vah's Witnesses. I thought I was not implicated if I myself did not take 
part. 

The ordinary party member was being taught that grand policy was 
much too complex for him to judge it. Consequently, one felt one was 
being represented, never called upon to take personal responsibility. The 
whole structure of the system was aimed at preventing conflicts of con- 
science from even arising. The result was the total sterility of all conver- 
sations and discussions among these like-minded persons. It was boring 
for people to confirm one another in their uniform opinions. 

Worse still was the restriction of responsibility to one's own field. 
That was explicitly demanded. Everyone kept to his own group— of archi- 
tects, physicians, jurists, technicians, soldiers, or farmers. The professional 
organizations to which everyone had to belong were called chambers 
(Physicians' Chamber, Art Chamber), and this term aptly described the 
way people were immured in isolated, closed-off areas of life. The longer 
Hitler's system lasted, the more people's minds moved within such iso- 
lated chambers. If this arrangement had gone on for a number of genera- 
tions, it alone would have caused the whole system to wither, I think, 
for we would have arrived at a kind of caste society. The disparity be- 
tween this and the Volksgemeinschaft (community of the people) pro- 
claimed in 1933 always astonished me. For this had the effect of stamping 
out the promised integration, or at any rate of greatly hindering it. What 
eventually developed was a society of totally isolated individuals. For 
although it may sound strange today, for us it was no empty slogan that 
"the Fuehrer proposes and disposes" for all. 

We had been rendered susceptible to such ideas from our youth on. 
We had derived our principles from the Obrigkeitsstaat, the authoritarian 
though not totalitarian state of Imperial Germany. Moreover, we had 
learned those principles in wartime, when the state's authoritarian charac- 
ter had been further intensified. Perhaps the background had prepared 
us like soldiers for the kind of thinking we encountered once again in 
Hitler's system. Tight public order was in our blood; the liberalism of the 
Weimar Republic seemed to us by comparison lax, dubious, and in no 
way desirable. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 34 

In order to be available to my client at any time, I had rented a 
painter's studio on Behrenstrasse, a few hundred yards from the Chan- 
cellery, for my office. My assistants, all of them young, worked from 
morning until late at night without regard for their private lives. For 
lunch we generally had a few sandwiches. It would be nearly ten o'clock 
at night before we would quit and, exhausted, end our working day with 
a bite at the nearby Pfalzer Weinstube-where we would once more dis- 
cuss the day's labors. 

Major assignments did not come our way at once. I continued to 
receive a few occasional rush jobs from Hitler, who apparently thought 
that what I was chiefly good for was the speedy completion of commis- 
sions. The previous Chancellor's office on the second floor of the office 
building had three windows overlooking Wilhelmsplatz. During those 
early months of 1933 a crowd almost invariably gathered there and 
chanted their demand to see the Fuehrer. As a result, it had become im- 
possible for Hitler to work in the room, and he did not like it anyhow. 
"Much too small. Six hundred and fifty square feet— it might do for one of 
my assistants. Where would I sit with a state visitor? In this little corner 
here? And this desk is just about the right size for my office manager." 

Hitler had me refurbish a hall overlooking the garden as his new pri- 
vate office. For five years he contented himself with this room, although 
he considered it only temporary. But even after he moved into his office 
in the new Chancellery built in 1938, he soon came to feel that this too 
was unsatisfactory. By 1950, according to his instructions and my plans, 
a final new Chancellery was to be built. It was to include a palatial office 
for Hitler and his successors in coming centuries, which would measure 
ten thousand square feet— sixteen times larger than the original Chancel- 
lor's office. But after talking the matter over with Hitler, I tucked in a 
private office to supplement this vast hall; it again measured about six 
hundred square feet. 

As things worked out, the old office was not to be used. For 
Hitler wanted to be able to show himself to the crowd and therefore had 
me build a new "historic balcony" in great haste. "The window was really 
too inconvenient," Hitler remarked to me with satisfaction. "I could not 
be seen from all sides. After all, I could not very well lean out." But the 
architect of the first reconstruction of the Chancellery, Professor Eduard 
Jobst Siedler of the Berlin Institute of Technology, made a fuss about our 
doing violence to his work, and Lammers, chief of the Reich Chancery, 
agreed that our addition would constitute an infringement on an artist's 
copyright. Hitler scornfully dismissed these objections: "Siedler has 
spoiled the whole of Wilhelmsplatz. Why, that building looks like the 
headquarters of a soap company, not the center of the Reich. What does 
he think? That 111 let him build the balcony too?" But he propitiated the 
professor with another commission. 

A few months later I was told to build a barracks camp for the 



35 ) My Catalyst 

workmen of the autobahn, construction of which had just begun. Hitler 
was displeased with the kind of quarters hitherto provided and instructed 
me to develop a model which could be used for all such camps: with 
decent kitchens, washrooms, and showers, with a lounge and cabins 
containing only two beds each. These quarters were indeed a great im- 
provement over the building site barracks commonly used up to that 
time. Hitler took an interest in these model buildings and asked me to 
give him a report on their effect on the workers. This was just the attitude 
I had imagined the National Socialist leader would have. 

Until the remodeling of his Chancellor's residence was done, Hitler 
stayed in the apartment of State Secretary Lammers, on the top floor 
of the office building. Here I frequently had lunch or dinner with him. 
Evenings he usually had some trusty companions about: Schreck, his 
chauffeur of many years; Sepp Dietrich, the commander of his SS body- 
guard; Dr. Otto Dietrich, the press chief; Bruckner and Schaub, his two 
adjutants; and Heinrich Hoffmann, his official photographer. Since the 
table held no more than ten persons, this group almost completely filled 
it. For the midday meal, on the other hand, Hitler s old Munich comrades 
foregathered, such as Amann, Schwarz, and Esser or Gauleiter WagnSr. 
Frequently, Werlin was present also; he was head of the Munich branch 
of Daimler-Benz and supplier of Hitlers personal cars. Cabinet ministers 
seemed seldom present; I also saw very little of Himmler, Roehm, or 
Streicher at these meals, but Goebbels and Goering were often there. 
Even then all regular officials of the Chancellery were excluded. Thus 
it was noticeable that even Lammers, although the apartment was his, 
was never invited— undoubtedly with good reason. 

For in this circle Hitler often spoke his mind on the day's develop- 
ments. He used these sociable hours to work off the nervous strain of his 
office. He liked to describe the way he had broken the grip of the bureauc- 
racy, which threatened to strangle him in his capacity as Reich Chancellor: 

In the first few weeks every petty matter was brought to me for deci- 
sion. Every day I found heaps of files on my desk, and however much I 
worked there were always as many again. Finally, I put an end to that 
nonsense. If I had gone on that way, I would never have accomplished 
anything, simply because that stuff left me no time for thinking. When I 
refused to see the files they told me that important decisions would be 
held up. But I decided that I had to clear the decks so I could give my 
mind to the important things. That way I governed the course of develop- 
ment instead of being governed by the officials. 

Sometimes he talked about his drivers: 

Schreck was the best driver you can imagine, and our supercharger 
is good for over a hundred. We always drove very fast. But in recent years 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 36 

IVe told Schreck not to drive over fifty. How terrible if something had 
happened to me. What fun we had teasing the big American cars. We 
kept right behind them until they tried to lose us. Those Americans are 
junk compared to a Mercedes. Their motor couldn't take it; after a while 
it would overheat, and they'd have to pull over to the side of the road, 
looking glum. Served them right! 

Every evening a crude movie projector was set up to show the news- 
reel and one or two movies. In the early days the servants were extremely 
inept at handling the apparatus. Frequently, the picture was upside down 
or the film strip broke. In those days Hitler took such accidents with more 
good humor than his adjutants, who were fond of using the power they 
derived from their chief to bawl out underlings. 

The choice of films was a matter Hitler discussed with Goebbels. 
Usually they were the same ones being shown in the Berlin movie houses 
at the time. Hitler preferred light entertainment, love, and society films. 
All the films with Emil Jannings and Heinz Ruhmann, with Henny Porten, 
Lil Dagover, Olga Tschechowa, Zarah Leander, or Jenny Jugo had to be 
procured as quickly as possible. Revues with lots of leg display were sure 
to please him. Frequently we saw foreign films, including those that were 
withheld from the German public. Sports and mountaineering films were 
shown very rarely, animal and landscape movies and travelogues never. 
Hitler also had no feeling for the comedies of the kind I loved at the 
time, those featuring Buster Keaton or Charlie Chaplin. German movie 
production was not nearly sufficient to fill the quota of two new movies 
every day. Many were therefore shown twice or even more often— in- 
terestingly enough, never those with tragic plots. The ones we saw more 
than once were frequently spectaculars or movies with his favorite 
actors. His preferences, and the habit of seeing one or two films every 
evening, continued until the beginning of the war. 

At one of these dinners, in the winter of 1933, I happened to be 
seated beside Goering. "Is Speer doing your residence, my Fuehrer? Is 
he your architect?" I wasn't, but Hitler said I was. "Then permit me to 
have him remodel my house too." Hitler gave his consent, and Goering, 
scarcely inquiring what I thought of the proposal, put me into his big 
open limousine after the meal was over and dragged me off to his res- 
idence like a piece of booty. He had picked out for himself the former 
official residence of the Prussian Minister of Commerce, a palace that the 
Prussian state had built with great lavishness before 1914. It was situated 
in one of the gardens behind Leipziger Platz. 

Only a few months before, this residence had been expensively re- 
done according to Goering's own instructions, with Prussian state funds. 
Hitler had come to see it and commented deprecatingly: "Dark! How 
can anyone live in such darkness! Compare this with my professor s work. 



37 ) My Catalyst 

Everything bright, clear, and simple!" I did in fact find the place a 
romantically tangled warren of small rooms gloomy with stained-glass 
windows and heavy velvet hangings, cluttered with massive Renaissance 
furniture. There was a kind of chapel presided over by the swastika, and 
the new symbol had also been reiterated on ceilings, walls, and floors 
throughout the house. There was the feeling that something terribly 
solemn and tragic would always be going on in this place. 

It was characteristic of the system— and probably of all authoritarian 
forms of society-that Hitlers criticism and example produced an instant 
change in Goering. For he immediately repudiated the decorative scheme 
he had just completed, although he probably felt fairly comfortable in 
it, since it rather corresponded to his disposition. "Don't look at this," he 
said to me. "I cant stand it myself. Do it any way you like. I'm giving 
you a free hand; only it must turn out like the Fuehrers place." That 
was a fine assignment. Money, as was always the case with Goering, 
was no object. And so walls were ripped out, in order to turn the many 
rooms on the ground floor into four large rooms. The largest of these, 
his study, measured almost fifteen hundred square feet, thus approach- 
ing the size of Hitler s. An annex was added, mostly of glass framed in 
bronze. Bronze was in short supply; it was treated as a scarce metal 
and there were high penalties for using it for nonessential purposes, 
but that did not bother Goering in the least. He was rapturous every 
time he made an inspection; he beamed like a child on its birthday, 
rubbed his hands, and laughed. 

Goering's furniture suited his bulk. An old Renaissance desk was of 
enormous proportions, as was the desk chair whose back rose far above 
his head; it had probably been a prince's throne. On the desk he had 
two silver candelabra with enormous parchment shades to illuminate 
an oversized photograph of Hitler; the original, which Hitler had given 
him, had not seemed impressive enough. He had had it tremendously en- 
larged, and every visitor wondered at this special honor that Hitler had 
seemingly conferred on him, since it was well known in party and gov- 
ernment circles that Hitler presented his portrait to his paladins always 
in the same size, inside a silver frame specially designed for it by Frau 
Troost. 

There was an immense painting in the hall which could be drawn 
up to the ceiling in order to expose openings to a projection room 
behind the wall. The painting struck me as familiar. In fact, as I sub- 
sequently learned, Goering had in his unabashed fashion simply ordered 
Iris" director of the Kaiser Friedrich Museum to deliver the famous 
Rubens, Diana at the Stag Hunt, considered one of the museum's prize 
possessions, to his residence. 

During the reconstruction, Goering lived in the mansion of the 
President of the Reichstag, opposite the Reichstag itself, an early 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 38 

twentieth-century building with strong elements of nouveau riche ro- 
coco. Here our discussions about his future residence took place. Fre- 
quently present at these talks was one of the directors of the Vereinigte 
Werkstatten, Herr Paepke, a gray-haired elderly gentleman full of best 
intentions to please Goering, but cowed by the brusque manner Goering 
used with subordinates. 

One day we were sitting with Goering in a room whose walls were 
done in the Wilhelmine neorococo style, adorned from top to bottom 
with roses in bas-relief— quintessential atrociousness. Even Goering 
knew that when he asked: "How do you like this decoration, Herr 
Direktor? Not bad, is it?" Instead of saying, "It's ghastly," the old 
gentleman became unsure of himself. He did not want to disagree with 
his prominent employer and customer and answered evasively. Goering 
immediately scented an opportunity for a joke and winked at me: 
"But, Herr Direktor, don't you think it's beautiful? I mean to have you 
decorate all my rooms this way. We were talking about just that, 
weren't we, Herr Speer?" "Yes, of course, the drawings are already 
being made." "There you are, Herr Direktor. You see, this is the style 
were going to follow. I'm sure you like it." The director writhed; his 
artistic conscience brought beads of sweat to his forehead and his 
goatee quivered with distress. Goering had taken it into his head to 
make the old man forswear himself. "Now look at this wall carefully. 
See how wonderfully those roses twine their way up. Like being in a 
rose arbor out in the open. And you mean to say you can't feel enthu- 
siastic about this sort of thing?" "Oh yes, yes," the desperate man con- 
curred. "But you should be enthusiastic about such a work of art— a 
well-known connoisseur like you. Tell me, don't you think it's beautiful?" 
The game went on for a long time until the director gave in and voiced 
the praise Goering demanded. 

"They're all like that!" Goering afterward said contemptuously. 
And it was true enough: They were all like that, Goering included. For 
at meals he now never tired of telling Hitler how bright and expansive 
his home was now, "just like yours, my Fuehrer." 

If Hitler had had roses climbing the walls of his room, Goering 
would have insisted on roses. 

By the winter of 1933, only a few months after that decisive invita- 
tion to dinner, I had been taken into the circle of Hitler's intimates. 
There were very few persons besides myself who had been so favored. 
Hitler had undoubtedly taken a special liking to me, although I was 
by nature reticent and not very talkative. I have often asked myself 
whether he was projecting upon me his unfulfilled youthful dream of 
being a great architect. But given the fact that Hitler so often acted 
in a purely intuitive way, why he took to me so warmly remains a 
mystery. 



39 ) My Catalyst 

I was still a long way from my later neoclassical manner. By chance 
some plans which I drew up in the autumn of 1933 have been preserved. 
They were for a prize competition for a party school in Munich-Griin- 
wald. All German architects were invited to participate. My design 
already relied heavily on melodrama and a dominant axis, but I was 
still using the austere vocabulary I had learned from Tessenow. 

Hitler, along with Troost and myself, looked at the entries before 
the judging. The sketches were unsigned, as is mandatory in such com- 
petitions. Of course I did not win. After the verdict, when the incognitos 
were lifted, Troost in a studio conversation praised my sketch. And to 
my astonishment Hitler remembered it in detail, although he had looked 
at my plans for only a few seconds among a hundred others. He silently 
ignored Troost's praise; probably in the course of it he realized that I 
was still far from being an architect after his own heart. 

Hitler went to Munich every two or three weeks. More and more 
often, he took me along on these trips. In the train he would usually 
talk animatedly about which drawings "the professor" would probably 
have ready. "I imagine he's redone the ground-floor plan of the House 
of Art. There were some improvements needed there. ... I wonder 
whether the details for the dining room have been drafted yet? And then 
perhaps well be able to see the sketches for Wackerle's sculptures/' 

On arrival he usually went directly from the railroad station to Pro- 
fessor Troost's studio. It was situated in a battered backyard off 
Theresienstrasse, fairly near the Institute of Technology. We would go 
up two flights of a dreary stairway that had not been painted for years. 
Troost, conscious of his standing, never came to meet Hitler on the 
stairs, nor ever accompanied him downstairs when he left. In the 
anteroom, Hitler would greet him: "I can't wait, Herr Professor. Is there 
anything new— let's see it!" And we would plunge right in— Hitler and I 
would stand in the studio itself while Troost, composed and quiet as 
always, spread out his plans and the sketches of his ideas. But Hitler's 
foremost architect had no better luck than I later did; Hitler seldom 
showed his enthusiasm. 

Afterward Troost's wife, Frau Professor, would show samples of 
the textiles and wall colors to be used for the Munich Fuehrer Building. 
These were subtle and restrained, actually too understated for Hitler's 
taste, which inclined toward the gaudy. But he liked what he saw. The 
balanced bourgeois atmosphere which was then the fashion in wealthy 
society had about it a muted luxury that obviously appealed to him. 
Two or more hours would pass; then Hitler would take his leave, tersely 
but very cordially, to go to his own Munich apartment. He would throw 
a few quick words to me: "But come for lunch in the Osteria." 

At the usual time, around half past two, I went to the Osteria 
Bavaria, a small artists' restaurant which rose to unexpected fame when 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 40 

it became Hitler's regular restaurant. In a place like this, one could 
more easily imagine a table of artists gathered around Lenbach or 
Stuck, with long hair and huge beards, than Hitler with his neatly 
dressed or uniformed retinue. But he felt at ease in the Osteria; as 
a "frustrated artist" he obviously liked the atmosphere he had once 
sought to attain to, and now had finally both lost and surpassed. 

Quite often the select group of guests had to wait for hours for 
Hitler. There would be an adjutant, also Bavarian Gauleiter Wagner if 
by this time he had slept off last night's drinking bout, and of course 
Hitler s constant companion and court photographer, Hoffmann, who 
by this time was quite often slightly tipsy. Very often the likable Miss 
Unity Mitford was present, and sometimes, though rarely, a painter or a 
sculptor. Then there would be Dr. Dietrich, the Reich press chief, and 
invariably Martin Bormann, Rudolf Hess's secretary, who seemed utterly 
inconspicuous. On the street several hundred people would be waiting, 
for our presence was indication enough that he would be coming. 

Shouts of rejoicing outside. Hitler headed toward our regular 
corner, which was shielded on one side by a low partition. In good 
weather we sat in the small courtyard where there was a hint of an 
arbor. Hitler gave the owner and the two waitresses a jovial greeting: 
"What's good today? Ravioli? If only you didn't make it so delicious. 
It's too tempting!" Hitler snapped his fingers: "Everything would be 
perfect in your place, Herr Deutelmoser, if I did not have to think of my 
waistline. You forget that the Fuehrer cannot eat whatever he would like 
to." Then he would study the menu for a long time and order ravioli. 

Everyone ordered whatever he liked: cutlets, goulash, Hungarian 
wine from the cask. In spite of Hitler's occasional jokes about "carrion 
eaters" and "wine drinkers," everyone ate and drank with zest. In this 
circle there was a sense of privacy. One tacit agreement prevailed: No 
one must mention politics. The sole exception was Lady Mitford, who 
even in the later years of international tension persistently spoke up for 
her country and often actually pleaded with Hitler to make a deal with 
England. In spite of Hitler's discouraging reserve, she did not abandon 
her efforts through all those years. Then, in September 1939, on the day 
of England's declaration of war, she tried to shoot herself with a small 
pistol in Munich's Englischer Garten. Hitler had the best specialists in 
Munich care for her, and as soon as she could travel sent her home to 
England by a special railroad car through Switzerland. 

The principal topic during these meals was, regularly, the morning 
visit to Professor Troost. Hitler would be full of praise for what he 
had seen; he effortlessly remembered all the details. His relationship 
to Troost was somewhat that of a pupil to his teacher; it reminded me 
of my own uncritical admiration of Tessenow. 

I found this trait very engaging. I was amazed to see that this 



41 ) My Catalyst 

man, although worshiped by the people around him, was still capable 
of a kind of reverence. Hitler, who felt himself to be an architect, re- 
spected the superiority of the professional in this field. He would never 
have done that in politics. 

He talked frankly about how the Bruckmanns, a highly cultivated 
publishing family of Munich, had introduced him to Troost. It was, he 
said, "as if scales fell from my eyes" when he saw Troost's work. "I 
could no longer bear the things I had drawn up to then. What a piece 
of good luck that I met this man!" One could only assent; it is ghastly 
to think what his architectural taste would have been like without 
Troost's influence. He once showed me his sketchbook of the early 
twenties. I saw attempts at public buildings in the neobaroque style of 
Vienna's Ringstrasse— products of the eighteen-nineties. Curiously 
enough, such architectural sketches often shared the page with sketches 
of weapons and warships. 

In comparison to that sort of thing, Troost's architecture was 
actually spare. Consequently, his influence upon Hitler remained mar- 
ginal. Up to the end Hitler lauded the architects and the buildings which 
had served him as models for his early sketches. Among these was the 
Paris Opera (built 1861-74) by Charles Gamier: "The stairwell is the 
most beautiful in the world. When the ladies stroll down in their costly 
gowns and uniformed men form lanes— Herr Speer, we must build 
something like that too!" He raved about the Vienna Opera: "The most 
magnificent opera house in the world, with marvelous acoustics. When 
as a young man I sat up there in the fourth gallery. . . ." Hitler had a 
story to tell about van der Null, one of the two architects of this build- 
ing: "He thought the opera house was a failure. You know, he was in 
such despair that on the day before the opening he put a bullet through 
his head. At the dedication it turned out to be his greatest success; 
everyone praised the architect." Such remarks quite often led him to ob- 
servations about difficult situations in which he himself had been 
involved and in which some fortunate turn of events had again and 
again saved him. The lesson was: You must never give up. 

He was especially fond of the numerous theaters built by Hermann 
Helmer (1849-1919) and Ferdinand Fellner (1847-1916), who had pro- 
vided both Austria-Hungary and Germany at the end of the nineteenth 
century with many late-baroque theaters, all in the same pattern. He 
knew where all their buildings were and later had the neglected 
theater in Augsburg renovated. 

But he also appreciated the stricter architects of the nineteenth 
century such as Gottfried Semper (1803-79), w ^o built the Opera 
House and the Picture Gallery in Dresden and the Hofburg and the 
court museums in Vienna, as well as Theophil Hansen (1803-83), who 
had designed several impressive classical buildings in Athens and 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 42 

Vienna. As soon as the German troops took Brussels in 1940, I was 
dispatched there to look at the huge Palace of Justice by Poelaert 
(1817-79), which Hitler raved about, although he knew it only from 
its plans (which was also true of the Paris Opera). After my return 
he had me give him a detailed description of the building. 

Such were Hitlers architectural passions. But ultimately he was 
always drawn back to inflated neobaroque such as Kaiser Wilhelm II 
had also fostered, through his court architect Ihne. Fundamentally, it 
was decadent baroque, comparable to the style that accompanied the 
decline of the Roman Empire. Thus, in the realm of architecture, as in 
painting and sculpture, Hitler really remained arrested in the world of 
his youth: the world of 1880 to 1910, which stamped its imprint on his 
artistic taste as on his political and ideological conceptions. 

Contradictory impulses were typical of Hitler. Thus he would sing 
the praises of the Viennese examples that had impressed him in his 
youth, and in the same breath would declare: 

I first learned what architecture is from Troost. When I had some 
money, I bought one piece of furniture after the other from him. I looked 
at his buildings, at the appointments of the Europa, and always gave thanks 
to fate for appearing to me in the guise of Frau Bruckmann and leading 
this master to me. When the party had greater means, I commissioned him 
to remodel and furnish the Brown House. YouVe seen it. What trouble I 
had on account of it! Those philistines in the party thought it was a waste 
of money. And how much I learned from the Professor in the course of 
that remodeling! 

Paul Ludwig Troost was a Westphalian, extremely tall and spare, 
with a close-shaven head. Restrained in conversation, eschewing ges- 
tures, he belonged to a group of architects such as Peter Behrens, 
Joseph M. Olbrich, Bruno Paul, and Walter Gropius who before 1914 
led a reaction against the highly ornamented Jugendstil and advocated 
a lean approach, almost devoid of ornament, and a spartan tradi- 
tionalism with which they combined elements of modernity. Troost 
had occasionally won prizes in competitions, but before 1933 he was 
never able to advance into the leading group of German architects. 

There was no "Fuehrers style," for all that the party press ex- 
patiated on this subject. What was branded as the official architecture 
of the Reich was only the neoclassicism transmitted by Troost; it was 
multiplied, altered, exaggerated, and sometimes distorted to the point 
of ludicrousness. Hitler appreciated the permanent qualities of the 
classical style all the more because he thought he had found certain 
points of relationship between the Dorians and his own Germanic 
world. Nevertheless, it would be a mistake to try to look within 



43 ) My Catalyst 

Hitlers mentality for some ideologically based architectural style. 
That would not have been in keeping with his pragmatic way of 
thinking. 

Undoubtedly Hitler had something in mind when he regularly 
took me along on those architectural consultations in Munich. He must 
have wanted me in my turn to become a disciple of Troost. I was eager 
to learn and actually did learn a good deal from Troost. The elaborate 
but restrained architecture of my second teacher decisively influ- 
enced me. 

The prolonged table talk in the Osteria was brought to an end: 
"The Professor told me that the stairwell in the Fuehrer House is 
being paneled today. I can hardly wait to see it. Bruckner, send for the 
car— well drive right over." And to me: "You'll come along?" 

He would hurry straight from the car to the stairwell in the 
Fuehrer House, inspect it from downstairs, from the gallery, from the 
stairs, then go upstairs again, full of enthusiasm. Finally he would 
look over the entire building. He would once again demonstrate his 
familiarity with every detail of the plans and sufficiently astonish 
everyone concerned with the building. Satisfied with the progress, 
satisfied with himself because he was the cause and prime mover of 
these buildings, he went to his next destination: The home of his 
photographer in Munich-Bogenhausen. 

In good weather coffee would be served in the Hoffmanns' little 
garden. Surrounded by the gardens of other villas, it was hardly more 
than two thousand feet square. Hitler tried to resist the cake, but 
finally consented, with many compliments to Frau Hoffmann, to have 
some put on his plate. If the sun were shining brightly the Fuehrer 
and Reich Chancellor might even take off his coat and lie down on the 
grass in shirtsleeves. At the Hoffmanns' he felt at home; once he sent 
for a volume of Ludwig Thoma and read a passage aloud. 

Hitler particularly looked forward to the paintings which the 
photographer had brought to his house for the Fuehrer to choose 
from. At first I was stunned at what Hoffmann showed Hitler and 
what met with his approval. Later I grew accustomed to Hitlers 
taste in art, though I myself still went on collecting early romantic 
landscapes by such painters as Rottmann, Fries, or Kobell. 

One of Hitler s as well as Hoffmann's favorite painters was Eduard 
Griitzner, whose pictures of tipsy monks and inebriated butlers seemed 
hardly the right sort of thing for a teetotaler like Hitler. But Hitler 
regarded these paintings solely from their "artistic' aspect: "What, 
that one is priced at only five thousand marks?" The painting's market 
value could not have been more than two thousand marks. "Do you 
know, Hoffmann, that's a steal! Look at these details. Griitzner is 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 44 

greatly underrated." The next work by this painter cost him con- 
siderably more. "It's simply that he hasn't been discovered yet. Rem- 
brandt also counted for nothing for many decades after his death. His 
pictures were practically given away. Believe me, this Griitzner will 
some day be worth as much as a Rembrandt. Rembrandt himself 
couldn't have painted that better." 

For all departments of art Hitler regarded the late nineteenth 
century as one of the greatest cultural epochs in human history. That 
it was not yet recognized as such, he said, was only because we were 
too close to it in time. But his appreciation stopped at Impressionism, 
whereas the naturalism of a Leibl or a Thoma suited his activistic 
approach to art. Makart ranked highest; he also thought highly of 
Spitzweg. In this case I could understand his feeling, although what 
he admired was not so much the bold and often impressionistic brush- 
work as the staunch middle-class genre quality, the affable humor 
with which Spitzweg gently mocked the small-town Munich of his 
period. 

Later, to the consternation of the photographer, it turned out 
that a forger had exploited this fondness for Spitzweg. Hitler began 
to be uneasy about which of his Spitzwegs were genuine, but quickly 
repressed these doubts and commented maliciously: "You know, some 
of the Spitzwegs that Hoffmann has hanging are fake. I can tell at a 
glance. But let's not take away his pleasure in them." He said that 
last with the Bavarian intonation he liked to fall into while in Munich. 

He frequently visited Carlton's Tearoom, a bogus luxurious place 
with reproduction furniture and fake crystal chandeliers. He liked it 
because the people there left him undisturbed, did not bother him with 
applause or requests for autographs, as was generally the case else- 
where in Munich. 

Frequently, I would receive a telephone call late at night from 
Hitler's apartment: 'The Fuehrer is driving over to the Cafe Heck 
and has asked that you come too." I would have to get out of bed 
and had no prospect of returning before two or three o'clock in the 
morning. 

Occasionally Hitler would apologize. "I formed the habit of 
staying up late during our days of struggle. After rallies I would 
have to sit down with the old fighters, and besides my speeches 
usually stirred me up so much that I would not have been able to sleep 
before early morning." 

The Cafe Heck, in contrast to Carlton's Tearoom, was furnished 
with plain wooden chairs and iron tables. It was the old party cate 
where Hitler used to meet his comrades. But any such meetings stopped 
after 1933. The Munich group had shown him such devotion over so 
many years that I had expected him to have a group of close Munich 



45 ) My Catalyst 

friends; but there was nothing of the sort. On the contrary, Hitler 
tended to become sulky when one of the old comrades wanted to speak 
to him and almost always managed to refuse or delay such requests on 
all sorts of pretexts. No doubt the old party comrades did not always 
assume the tone of respectful distance that Hitler, for all the geniality 
he outwardly displayed, now thought proper. Frequently, they adopted 
an air of unseemly familiarity; what they supposed was their well- 
earned right to such intimacy no longer comported with the historical 
role Hitler by now attributed to himself. 

On extremely rare occasions he might still pay a visit to one or 
another of them. They had meanwhile acquired lordly mansions; most 
of them held important offices. Their one annual meeting was the 
anniversary of the putsch of November 9, 1923, which was celebrated 
in the Biirgerbraukeller. Surprisingly, Hitler did not at all look forward 
to these reunions; it was clear that he found it distasteful to have 
to be present. 

After 1933 there quickly formed various rival factions that held 
divergent views, spied on each other, and held each other in contempt. 
A mixture of scorn and dislike became the prevailing mood within the 
party. Each new dignitary rapidly gathered a circle of intimates 
around him. Thus Himmler associated almost exclusively with his SS 
following, from whom he could count on unqualified respect. Goering 
also had his band of uncritical admirers, consisting partly of members 
of his family, partly of his closest associates and adjutants. Goebbels 
felt at ease in the company of literary and movie people. Hess occu- 
pied himself with problems of homeopathic medicine, loved chamber 
music, and had screwy but interesting acquaintances. 

As an intellectual Goebbels looked down on the crude philistines 
of the leading group in Munich, who for their part made fun of the 
conceited academics literary ambitions. Goering considered neither 
the Munich philistines nor Goebbels sufficiently aristocratic for him, 
and therefore avoided all social relations with them; whereas Himmler, 
filled with the elitist missionary zeal of the SS (which for a time ex- 
pressed itself in a bias for the sons of princes and counts), felt far 
superior to all the others. Hitler, too, had his retinue, which went 
everywhere with him. Its membership, consisting of chauffeurs, the 
photographer, his pilot, and secretaries, remained always the same. 

Hitler held these divergent circles together politically. But after 
a year in power, neither Himmler nor Goering nor Hess appeared 
frequently enough at his dinner table or movie showings for there to 
be any semblance of a "society" of the new regime. When they did 
come their interest was so completely concentrated upon wooing 
Hitlers favor that no cross-connections to the other groups sprang up. 

To be sure, Hitler did not foster any social ties among the leaders. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 46 

In fact, as his situation grew increasingly critical in later years, he 
watched any efforts at rapprochement with keen suspicion. Not until 
it was all over did the still surviving heads of these isolated miniature 
worlds meet all together in a Luxemburg hotel— and then only be- 
cause they had no choice in the matter, for they were all prisoners. 

During these stays in Munich, Hitler paid little attention to gov- 
ernment or party business, even less than in Berlin or at Obersalzberg. 
Usually only an hour or two a day remained available for conferences. 
Most of his time he spent marching about building sites, relaxing in 
studios, caf£s, and restaurants, or hurling long monologues at his 
associates who were already amply familiar with the unchanging 
themes and painfully tried to conceal their boredom. 

After two or three days in Munich, Hitler usually ordered prepara- 
tions for the drive to "the mountain'— Obersalzberg. We rode over 
dusty highways in several open cars; the autobahn to Salzburg did not 
exist in those days, although it was being built on a priority basis. 
Usually the motorcade stopped for coffee in a village inn at Lambach 
am Chiemsee, which served delicious pastries that Hitler could scarcely 
ever resist. Then the passengers in the following cars once more swal- 
lowed dust for two hours, for the column rode in close file. After 
Berchtesgaden came the steep mountain road full of potholes, until 
we arrived at Hitler's small, pleasant wooden house on Obersalzberg. 
It had a wide overhanging roof and modest interior: a dining room, a 
small living room, and three bedrooms. The furniture was bogus old- 
German peasant style and gave the house a comfortable petit-bourgeois 
look. A brass canary cage, a cactus, and a rubber plant intensified this 
impression. There were swastikas on knickknacks and pillows em- 
broidered by admiring women, combined with, say, a rising sun or a 
vow of "eternal loyalty." Hitler commented to me with some embarrass- 
ment: "I know these are not beautiful things, but many of them are 
presents. I shouldn't like to part with them." 

Soon he emerged from his bedroom, having changed out of his 
jacket into a Bavarian sports coat of light-blue linen, which he wore 
with a yellow tie. Usually he fell to talking about his building plans. 

A few hours later a small Mercedes sedan would drive up with his 
two secretaries, Fraulein Wolf and Fraulein Schroder. A simple Munich 
girl would usually be with them. She was pleasant and fresh-faced 
rather than beautiful and had a modest air. There was nothing about 
her to suggest that she was a ruler's mistress: Eva Braun. 

This sedan was never allowed to drive in the official motorcade, for 
no one was to connect it with Hitler. The secretaries also served the func- 
tion of disguising the mistress's presence. I could only wonder at the way 
Hitler and Eva Braun avoided anything that might suggest an intimate 



47 ) My Catalyst 

relationship— only to go upstairs to the bedrooms together late at night. It 
has always remained incomprehensible to me why this needless, forced 
practice of keeping their distance was continued even in this inner circle 
whose members could not help being aware of the truth. 

Eva Braun kept her distance from every one of Hitler s intimates. 
She was the same toward me too; that changed only in the course of 
years. When we became more familiar with one another I realized that 
her reserved manner, which impressed many people as haughty, was 
merely embarrassment; she was well aware of her dubious position in 
Hitler s court. 

During those early years of our acquaintanceship Hitler, Eva Braun, 
an adjutant, and a servant were the only persons who stayed in the small 
house; we guests, five or six of us, including Martin Bormann and Press 
Chief Dietrich, as well as the two secretaries, were put up in a nearby 
pension. 

Hitler s decision to settle on Obersalzberg seemed to point to a love 
of nature. But I was mistaken about that. He did frequently admire a 
beautiful view, but as a rule he was more affected by the awesomeness of 
the abysses than by the harmony of a landscape. It may be that he felt 
more than he allowed himself to express. I noticed that he took little 
pleasure in flowers and considered them entirely as decorations. Some 
time around 1934, when a delegation of Berlin women's organizations was 
planning to welcome Hitler at Anhalter Station and hand him flowers, 
the head of the organization called Hanke, then the Propaganda Minis- 
ter s secretary, to ask what Hitlers favorite flower was. Hanke said to me: 
I've telephoned around, asked the adjutants, but there's no answer. He 
hasn't any." He reflected for a while: "What do you think, Speer? 
Shouldn't we say edelweiss? I think edelweiss sounds right. First of all 
it's rare and then it also comes from the Bavarian mountains. Let's simply 
say edelweiss!" From then on the edelweiss was officially "the Fuehrer's 
flower." The incident shows how much liberty party propaganda some- 
times took in shaping Hitler's image. 

Hitler often talked about mountain tours he had undertaken in the 
past. From a mountain climber's point of view, however, they did not 
amount to much. He rejected mountain climbing or alpine skiing: "What 
pleasure can there be in prolonging the horrible winter artificially by 
staying in the mountains?" His dislike for snow burst out repeatedly, long 
before the catastrophic winter campaign of 1941-42. "If I had my way 
I'd forbid these sports, with all the accidents people have doing them. But 
of course the mountain troops draw their recruits from such fools." 

Between 1934 and 1936 Hitler still took tramps on the public forest 
paths, accompanied by his guests and three or four plainclothes detec- 
tives belonging to his SS bodyguard. At such times Eva Braun was per- 
mitted to accompany him, but only trailing along with the two secre- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 48 

taries at the end of the file. It was considered a sign of favor when he 
called someone up to the front, although conversation with him flowed 
rather thinly. After perhaps half an hour Hitler would change partners: 
"Send the press chief to me," and the companion of the moment would 
be demoted back to the rear. Hitler set a fast pace. Frequently other 
walkers met us; they would pause at the side of the path, offering reverent 
greetings. Some would take up their courage, usually women or girls, and 
address Hitler, whereupon he would respond with a few friendly words. 

The destination was often the Hochlenzer, a small mountain inn, on 
the Scharitzkehl, about an hour's walk, where we sat outside at plain 
wooden tables and had a glass of milk or beer. On rare occasions there 
would be a longer tour; I remember one with General von Blomberg, 
the Commander in Chief of the army. We had the impression that weighty 
military problems were being discussed, since everyone had to stay far 
enough behind to be out of hearing. Even when we rested for a while 
in a clearing in the woods, Hitler had his servant spread his blankets 
at a considerable distance from the rest of us, and he stretched out on 
them with the general— a peaceful and innocent-seeming sight. 

Another time we drove by car to the Konigssee and from there by 
motorboat to the Bartholoma Peninsula; or else we took a three-hour 
hike over the Scharitzkehl to the Konigssee. On the last part of this walk 
we had to thread our way through numerous strollers who had been 
lured out by the lovely weather. Interestingly enough, these many people 
did not immediately recognize Hitler in his rustic Bavarian clothes, since 
scarcely anyone imagined that he would be among the hikers. But shortly 
before we reached our destination, the Schiffmeister restaurant, a band 
of enthusiasts began excitedly following our group; they had belatedly 
realized whom they had encountered. Hitler in the lead, almost running, 
we barely reached the door before we were overtaken by the swelling 
crowd. We sat over coffee and cake while the big square outside filled. 
Hitler waited until police reinforcements had been brought up before he 
entered the open car, which had been driven there to meet us. The front 
seat was folded back, and he stood beside the driver, left hand resting on 
the windshield, so that even those standing at a distance could see him. 
Two men of the escort squad walked in front of the car, three more on 
either side, while the car moved at a snail's pace through the throng. I 
sat as usual in the jump seat close behind Hitler and shall never forget 
that surge of rejoicing, the ecstasy reflected in so many faces. Wherever 
Hitler went during those first years of his rule, wherever his car stopped 
for a short time, such scenes were repeated. The mass exultation was not 
called forth by rhetoric or suggestion, but solely by the effect of Hitler's 
presence. Whereas individuals in the crowd were subject to this influence 
only for a few seconds at a time, Hitler himself was eternally exposed to 
the worship of the masses. At the time I admired him for nevertheless 
retaining his informal habits in private. 



49 ) My Catalyst 

Perhaps it is understandable that I was carried along by these 
tempests of homage. But it was even more overwhelming for me to 
speak with the idol of a nation a few minutes or a few hours later, to 
discuss building plans with him, sit beside him in the theater, or eat 
ravioli with him in the Osteria. It was this contrast that overcame me. 

Only a few months before I had been carried away by the prospect 
of drafting and executing buildings. Now I was completely under Hitler s 
spell, unreservedly and unthinkingly held by him. I was ready to follow 
him anywhere. Yet his ostensible interest in me was only to launch me on 
a glorious career as an architect. Years later, in Spandau, I read Ernst 
Cassirer's comment on the men who of their own accord threw away 
man's highest privilege: to be an autonomous person.* 

Now I was one of them. 

Two deaths in 1934 delimited the private and the political realms. 
After some weeks of severe illness, Hitler's architect Troost died on Janu- 
ary 21; and on August 2, Reich President von Hindenburg passed away. 
His death left the way clear for Hitler to assume total power. 

On October 15, 1933, Hitler had solemnly laid the cornerstone for the 
House of German Art in Munich. He delivered the ceremonial hammer 
blows with a fine silver hammer Troost had designed specially for this 
day. But the hammer broke. Now, four months later, Hitler remarked to 
us: "When that hammer shattered I knew at once it was an evil omen. 
Something is going to happen, I thought. Now we know why the ham- 
mer broke. The architect was destined to die." I have witnessed quite a 
few examples of Hitler's superstitiousness. 

But for me Troost's death meant a grave loss. A close relationship 
had just become established between us, and I counted on profiting, 
both humanly and artistically, from it. Funk, then state secretary in 
Goebbels's Propaganda Ministry, took a different view. On the day of 
Troost's death I met him in Goebbels's anteroom, a long cigar in his round 
face. "Congratulations! Now you're the first!" he said to me. 

I was twenty-eight years old. 



In The Myth of the State (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1946), p. 286, 
Ernst Cassirer writes: "But here are men, men of education and intelligence, honest 
and upright men who suddenly give up the highest human privilege. They have 
ceased to be free and personal agents/' And earlier: "Man no longer questions his 
environment; he accepts it as a matter of course." 



s 

Architectural Megalomania 



For a while it looked as if hitler himself intended to take over 
Troost's office. He worried lest the plans be carried out without the 
necessary sympathy with the deceased architect's vision. "I'd best take 
that in hand myself," he remarked. This notion, after all, was no stranger 
than his later assuming supreme command of the army. 

No doubt he had several weeks enjoyment out of imagining himself 
as the head of a smoothly functioning studio. On the trip to Munich he 
sometimes prepared himself for the role by discussing designs or making 
sketches, and a few hours later he would be sitting at the bureau mana- 
ger's drawing board correcting plans. But Bureau Manager Gall, a simple, 
straightforward Bavarian, defended Troost's work with unexpected ten- 
acity. He did not accept the highly detailed suggestions Hitler drafted 
and showed that he could do better. 

Hitler acquired confidence in him and soon tacitly dropped his plan. 
He acknowledged the man s ability. After some time he made Gall chief 
of the studio and gave him additional assignments. 

Hitler also remained close to the deceased architect's widow, with 
whom he had been friendly for a long time. She was a woman of taste 
and character who defended her frequently idiosyncratic views more 
obstinately than a good many men in high office. She came to the defense 
of her husband's work with a determination and sometimes a heatedness 
that made her much feared. Thus, she lashed out at Bonatz when he was 

(50) 



51 ) Architectural Megalomania 

so imprudent as to object to Troost's design for Konigsplatz in Munich. 
She violently attacked the modern architects Vorhoelzer and Abel. In all 
these cases her views were the same as Hitler's. In addition she introduced 
her favorite Munich architects to him, made deprecatory or favorable 
remarks about artists and artistic events, and because Hitler frequently 
listened to her, became a kind of arbiter of art in Munich. But unfortu- 
nately not on questions of painting. For Hitler had given his photogra- 
pher, Hoffmann, the job of first sifting through the paintings submitted 
for the annual Grand Art Show. Frau Troost frequently protested against 
the one-sided selection, but in this field Hitler would not give way to her, 
so that she soon stopped going to the shows. 

If I myself wanted to give paintings to associates, I chose them from 
among the excluded pictures stored in the cellars of the House of Ger- 
man Art. Nowadays, when I see these paintings here and there in the 
homes of acquaintances, I am struck by the fact that they can scarcely 
be distinguished from the pictures that were actually shown at the time. 
The differences, once the subject of such violent controversies, have 
melted away in the interval. 

I was in Berlin during the Roehm putsch.* Tension hung over the 
city. Soldiers in battle array were encamped in the Tiergarten. Trucks 
full of police holding rifles cruised the streets. There was clearly an air 
of "something cooking," similar to that of July 20, 1944, which I would 
likewise experience in Berlin. 

The next day Goering was presented as the savior of the situation in 
Berlin. Late on the morning of July 1, Hitler returned after making a 
series of arrests in Munich, and I received a telephone call from his 
adjutant: "Have you any new designs? If so, bring them here!" That 
suggested that Hitler s entourage was trying to distract him by turning 
his mind to his architectural interests. 

Hitler was extremely excited and, as I believe to this day, inwardly 
convinced that he had come through a great danger. Again and again he 
described how he had forced his way into the Hotel Hanselmayer in 
Wiessee— not forgetting, in the telling, to make a show of his courage: 
"We were unarmed, imagine, and didn't know whether or not those swine 
might have armed guards to use against us." The homosexual atmosphere 
had disgusted him: "In one room we found two naked boysl" Evidently 
he believed that his personal action had averted a disaster at the last 
minute: "I alone was able to solve this problem. No one else!" 

His entourage tried to deepen his distaste for the executed SA leaders 
by assiduously reporting as many details as possible about the intimate 

* The Blood Purge of June 30, 1934. The official version was that Ernst Roehm, 
leader of the SA, was planning a putsch; hence the name.— Translators' note. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( $% 

life of Roehm and his following. Bruckner showed Hitler the menus of 
banquets held by the Roehm clique, which had purportedly been found 
in the Berlin SA headquarters. The menus listed a fantastic variety of 
courses, including foreign delicacies such as frogs' legs, birds' tongues, 
shark fins, seagulls' eggs, along with vintage French wines and the best 
champagnes. Hitler commented sarcastically: "So, here we have those 
revolutionaries! And our revolution was too tame for them." 

After paying a call on the President he returned overjoyed. Hinden- 
burg had approved his operation, he said, saying something like: "When 
circumstances require it, one must not shrink from the most extreme 
action. One must be able to spill blood also." The newspapers concur- 
rently reported that President von Hindenburg had officially praised 
Chancellor Hitler and Prussian Prime Minister Hermann Goering* for 
their action. 

The leadership became frenziedly busy justifying the operation. A 
day of great activity ended with a speech by Hitler to a special session of 
the Reichstag. His feelings of guilt were audible in his protestations of 
innocence. A Hitler defending himself was something we would not 
encounter again in the future, not even in 1939, at the beginning of the 
war. Even Minister of Justice Gurtner was dragged into the proceedings. 
Since he was nonpartisan and consequently did not appear to be depen- 
dent on Hitler, his support carried special weight with all doubters. The 
fact that the army silently accepted General Schleicher's death seemed 
highly significant. But what most impressed me, as well as many of my 
unpolitical acquaintances, was the attitude of Hindenburg. The field 
marshal of the First World War was held in reverence by people of 
middle-class origins. Even in my school days he epitomized the strong, 
steadfast hero of modern history, and as such seemed to belong to a 
somewhat legendary realm. During the last year of the war, we children 
were allowed to take part in the nationwide ceremony of driving nails 
into huge statues of Hindenburg— each nail representing a contribution of 
a mark. Thus for as long as I could remember he had been for me the 
symbol of authority. That Hitler's action was approved by this supreme 
judge was highly reassuring. 

It was no accident that after the Roehm putsch the Right, repre- 
sented by the President, the Minister of Justice, and the generals, lined 
up behind Hitler. These men were free of radical anti-Semitism of the 
sort Hitler advocated. They in fact despised that eruption of plebeian 
hatreds. Their conservatism had nothing in common with racist delusions. 
Their open display of sympathy for Hitler's intervention sprang from 
quite different causes: in the Blood Purge of June 30, 1934, the strong 

* While in prison I learned from Funk that Hindenburg had made a similar re- 
mark to him. The inside story of Hindenburg's congratulatory telegram remains an 
unfathomable mystery. 



53 ) Architectural Megalomania 

left wing of the party, represented chiefly by the SA, was eliminated. 
That wing had felt cheated of the fruits of the revolution. And not 
without reason. For the majority of the members of the SA, raised in 
the spirit of revolution before 1933, had taken Hitler s supposedly social- 
ist program seriously. During my brief period of activity in Wannsee I 
had been able to observe, on the lowest plane, how the ordinary SA man 
sacrificed himself for the movement, giving up time and personal safety 
in the expectation that he would some day receive tangible compensation. 
When nothing came of that, anger and discontent built up. It could easily 
have reached the explosive point. Possibly Hitlers action did indeed avert 
that "second revolution" Roehm was supposed to have been plotting. 

With such arguments we soothed our consciences. I myself and many 
others snatched avidly at excuses; the things that would have offended 
us two years before we now accepted as the standard of our new environ- 
ment. Any troublesome doubts were repressed. At a distance of decades 
I am staggered by our thoughtlessness in those years. 1 

These events led the very next day to a new commission for me. 
"You must rebuild the Borsig Palace as quickly as possible. I want to 
transfer the top SA leadership from Munich to Berlin, so that I can have 
them nearby in the future. Go over there and start at once." To my objec- 
tion that the offices of the Vice Chancellor were in the Borsig Palace, 
Hitler merely replied: "Tell them to clear out right away! Don t give that 
a second thought!" 

With these orders, I promptly went over to Papen s office. The office 
manager of course knew nothing about the plan. He proposed that I 
wait for a few months until new quarters had been found and prepared. 
When I returned to Hitler, he flew into a rage. He again ordered that 
the building be immediately evacuated and told me to begin on my 
project without consideration for the presence of the officials. 

Papen remained invisible. His officials wavered but promised to 
arrange their files and transfer them to a provisional home in a week or 
two. I thereupon ordered the workmen to move into the building with- 
out further ado and encouraged them to knock the heavy plaster decora- 
tions from the walls and ceilings in halls and anterooms, creating the 
maximum noise and dust. The dust wafted through the cracks of the 
doors into the offices, and the racket made all work impossible. Hitler 
was delighted. Along with his expressions of approval he made jokes 
about the "dusty bureaucrats." 

Twenty-four hours later they moved out. In one of the rooms I saw 
a large pool of dried blood on the floor. There, on June 30, Herbert von 
Bose, one of Papen s assistants, had been shot. I looked away and from 
then on avoided the room. But the incident did not affect me any more 
deeply than that. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 54 

On August 2, Hindenburg died. That same day Hitler personally 
commissioned me to take care of the background for the funeral cere- 
monies at the Tannenberg Monument in East Prussia. 

I had a high wooden stand built in the inner courtyard. Decorations 
were limited to banners of black crepe hung from the high towers that 
framed the inner courtyard. Himmler turned up for a few hours with a 
staff of SS leaders and had his men explain the security measures to me. 
He retained his aloofness while I set forth my sketch. He gave me the 
impression of cold impersonality. He did not seem to deal with people 
but rather to manipulate them. 

The benches of fresh, light-colored wood disturbed the intended 
impression. The weather was good, and so I had the structure painted 
black; but unfortunately toward evening it began to rain. The rain con- 
tinued for the next few days and the paint remained wet. We had bales 
of black cloth flown by special plane from Berlin and covered the 
benches with it. Nevertheless the wet paint soaked through, and a good 
many of the funeral guests must have ruined their clothes. 

On the eve of the funeral the coffin was brought on a gun carriage 
from Neudeck, Hindenburg's East Prussian estate, to one of the towers 
of the monument. Torchbearers and the traditional flags of German regi- 
ments of the First World War accompanied it; not a single word was 
spoken, not a command given. This reverential silence was more impres- 
sive than the organized ceremonial of the following days. 

In the morning Hindenburg's coffin was placed on a bier in the 
center of the Court of Honor. The speaker's lectern was set up right 
beside it, rather than at a discreet distance. Hitler stepped forward. 
Schaub took the manuscript of his funeral oration from a briefcase and 
laid it on the lectern. Hitler began to speak, hesitated, and shook his 
head angrily in a manner quite out of keeping with the solemnity of the 
occasion. The adjutant had given him the wrong manuscript. After the 
mistake was corrected, Hitler read a surprisingly cool, formal memorial 
address. 

Hindenburg had long— much too long for Hitler's impatience— made 
difficulties for him. The old man had been rigid and thick-headed on 
many matters; Hitler had often had to resort to cunning, cleverness, or 
intrigue to win him over. One of Hitler's shrewd moves had been to send 
Funk, then still Goebbels's state secretary and an East Prussian by birth, 
to the President's morning press briefing. As a fellow countryman, Funk 
was often able to take the sting out of a bit of news that Hindenburg 
found objectionable or to present the matter so that the President did 
not take offense. 

Hindenburg and many of his political allies had expected the new 
regime to reinstate the monarchy. Any such step, however, was far from 
Hitler's mind. He was apt to make such remarks as: 



55 ) Architectural Megalomania 

I've permitted the Social Democratic ministers like Severing to continue 
receiving their pensions. Think whatever you like about them, you have to 
grant there is one thing to their credit: They did away with the monarchy. 
That was a great step forward. To that extent they prepared the way for us. 
And now we re supposed to bring back this monarchy? Am I to divide my 
power? Look at Italy! Do they think I'm that dumb? Kings have always 
been ungrateful to their foremost associates. We need only remember 
Bismarck. No, I'm not falling for that. Even though the Hohenzollerns are 
being so friendly right now. 

Early in 1934 Hitler surprised me with my first major commission. 
The temporary bleachers on the Zeppelin Field in Nuremberg were to be 
replaced by a permanent stone installation. I struggled over those first 
sketches until, in an inspired moment, the idea came to me: a mighty 
flight of stairs topped and enclosed by a long colonnade, flanked on both 
ends by stone abutments. Undoubtedly it was influenced by the Per- 
gamum altar. The indispensable platform for honored guests presented 
problems; I tried to place it as unobtrusively as possible midway in the 
flight of stairs. 

With some trepidation I asked Hitler to look at the model. I was 
worried because the design went far beyond the scope of my assign- 
ment. The structure had a length of thirteen hundred feet and a height 
of eighty feet. It was almost twice the length of the Baths of Caracalla 
in Rome. 

Hitler took his time looking at the plaster model from all sides, pro- 
fessionally assuming the proper eye level, silently studying the drawings, 
and remaining totally impassive through it all. I was beginning to think 
he would reject my work. Then, just as he had done that time at our first 
meeting, he tersely said, "Agreed," and took his leave. To this day I am 
not sure why, given as he was to long-winded comments, he remained 
so terse about such decisions. 

Where other architects were concerned, Hitler usually rejected the 
first draft. He liked an assignment to be worked over several times and 
even during construction would insist on changes in detail. But after this 
first test of my ability he let me go on without interference. Henceforth 
he respected my ideas and treated me, as an architect, as if I were his 
equal. 

Hitler liked to say that the purpose of his building was to transmit 
his time and its spirit to posterity. Ultimately, all that remained to remind 
men of the great epochs of history was their monumental architecture, 
he would philosophize. What had remained of the emperors of Rome? 
What would still bear witness to them today, if their buildings had not 
survived? Periods of weakness are bound to occur in the history of nations, 
he argued; but at their lowest ebb, their architecture will speak to them 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 56 

of former power. Naturally, a new national consciousness could not be 
awakened by architecture alone. But when after a long spell of inertia 
a sense of national grandeur was born anew, the monuments of men's 
ancestors were the most impressive exhortations. Today, for example, 
Mussolini could point to the buildings of the Roman Empire as symbol- 
izing the heroic spirit of Rome. Thus he could fire his nation with the 
idea of a modern empire. Our architectural works should also speak to 
the conscience of a future Germany centuries from now. In advancing 
this argument Hitler also stressed the value of a permanent type of 
construction. 

The building on the Zeppelin Field was begun at once, in order to 
have at least the platform ready for the coming Party Rally. To clear 
ground for it, the Nuremberg streetcar depot had to be removed. I 
passed by its remains after it had been blown up. The iron reinforcements 
protruded from concrete debris and had already begun to rust. One could 
easily visualize their further decay. This dreary sight led me to some 
thoughts which I later propounded to Hitler under the pretentious head- 
ing of "A Theory of Ruin Value." The idea was that buildings of modern 
construction were poorly suited to form that "bridge of tradition" to future 
generations which Hitler was calling for. It was hard to imagine that rust- 
ing heaps of rubble could communicate these heroic inspirations which 
Hitler admired in the monuments of the past. My "theory" was intended 
to deal with this dilemma. By using special materials and by applying 
certain principles of statics, we should be able to build structures which 
even in a state of decay, after hundreds or (such were our reckonings) 
thousands of years would more or less resemble Roman models. 2 

To illustrate my ideas I had a romantic drawing prepared. It showed 
what the reviewing stand on the Zeppelin Field would look like after 
generations of neglect, overgrown with ivy, its columns fallen, the walls 
crumbling here and there, but the outlines still clearly recognizable. In 
Hitlers entourage this drawing was regarded as blasphemous. That I 
could even conceive of a period of decline for the newly founded Reich 
destined to last a thousand years seemed outrageous to many of Hitler s 
closest followers. But he himself accepted my ideas as logical and illu- 
minating. He gave orders that in the future the important buildings of his 
Reich were to be erected in keeping with the principles of this 'law of 
ruins." 

In the course of an inspection of the Party Rally area Hitler turned 
to Bormann and in a few good-natured words said that I must hence- 
forth appear in party uniform. Those who were with him constantly, his 
doctor, the photographer, even the director of Daimler-Benz, had already 
received a uniform. The sight of a single civilian therefore struck a 
jarring note. But this little gesture also meant that Hitler now counted 



57 ) Architectural Megalomania 

me as a member of his intimate circle. He had never said a word of 
reproof when one of his acquaintances in the Chancellery or at the 
Berghof appeared in civilian dress, for Hitler himself preferred such dress 
whenever possible. But on his journeys and inspections he was appearing 
in an official capacity, and to his mind such occasions called for a uni- 
form. Thus, at the beginning of 1934, I was appointed Abteilungsleiter 
(department chief) on the staff of his deputy, Rudolf Hess. A few months 
later Goebbels conferred the same rank upon me within his staff for my 
contribution toward the Party Rally, the Harvest Festival, and the May 1 
celebration. 

After January 30, 1934, at the suggestion of Robert Ley, head of 
die Labor Front, a leisure-time organization was created. I was supposed 
to take over the section called Beauty of Labor; the name had provoked 
a good deal of mockery, as had the title Strength through Joy itself. A 
short while before, on a trip through the Dutch province of Limburg, 
Ley had seen a number of mines conspicuous for their neatness and 
cleanliness and surrounded by beautifully tended gardens. By tempera- 
ment Ley always tended to generalize, and he now wanted to have all 
of German industry follow this example. The project turned out to be 
an extremely gratifying one, at least for me personally. First we per- 
suaded factory owners to modernize their offices and to have some 
flowers about. But we did not stop there. Lawn was to take the place of 
asphalt. What had been wasteland was to be turned into little parks 
where the workers could sit during breaks. We urged that window areas 
within factories be enlarged and workers' canteens set up. What was 
more, we designed the necessary artifacts for these reforms, from simple, 
well-shaped flatware to sturdy furniture, all of which we had manufac- 
tured in large quantities. We provided educational movies and a coun- 
seling service to help businessmen on questions of illumination and 
ventilation. We were able to draw former union leaders and some mem- 
bers of the dissolved Arts and Crafts Society into this campaign. One 
and all devoted themselves to the cause of making some improvements 
in the workers' living conditions and moving closer to the ideal of a 
classless People's Community. However, it was somewhat dismaying to 
discover that Hitler took hardly any interest in these ideas. He who could 
lose himself in the details of an architectural project proved remarkably 
indifferent when I came to him with reports of my progress in this social 
area. The British ambassador in Berlin, at any rate, thought better of it 
than Hitler.* 

* Sir Neville Henderson, Failure of a Mission (New York, 1940), p. 15: "There 
are, in fact, many things in the Nazi organization and social institutions, as distinct 
from its rabid nationalism and ideology, which we might study and adapt to our own 
use with great profit both to the health and happiness of our own nation and old 
democracy." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 58 

It was due to my new party rank that in the spring of 1934 I received 
my first invitation to an official evening reception that Hitler gave as 
party chief, one to which wives were also invited. We were seated in 
groups of six to eight persons at round tables in the large dining hall of 
the Chancellor's residence. Hitler went from table to table, said a few 
friendly words, and made the acquaintance of the ladies. When he came 
up to us I introduced my wife, whom I had hitherto not mentioned to 
him. "Why have you deprived us of your wife for so long?" he com- 
mented privately a few days later, obviously much taken with her. In 
fact one reason I had avoided introducing her earlier was my dislike for 
the way Hitler treated his mistress. Moreover, it seemed to me that it 
should have been the business of the adjutants to invite my wife or to 
call Hitler s attention to her existence. But you could not expect any 
sense of etiquette from them. In the final analysis Hitler s own petit- 
bourgeois origins were reflected in the behavior of the adjutants. 

That first evening they met, Hitler said to my wife with a certain 
solemnity: "Your husband is going to erect buildings for me such as have 
not been created for four thousand years." 

Every year a rally was held at the Zeppelin Field for the assemblage 
of middle and minor party functionaries, the so-called Amtswalter, who 
were in charge of the various organizations affiliated with the NSDAP. 
While the SA, the Labor Front, and, of course, the army tried to make 
a good showing at its mass meetings and impress Hitler and visitors by 
their bearing and discipline, it proved a rather difficult task to present the 
Amtswalter in a favorable fashion. For the most part they had converted 
their small prebends into sizable paunches; they simply could not be 
expected to line up in orderly ranks. There were conferences about this 
problem in the Organization Section for Party Rallies, for the appearance 
of the Amtswalter had already provoked some sarcastic comments on 
Hitlers part. The saving idea came to me: "Let's have them march up 
in darkness." 

I explained my plan to the organization leaders of the Party Rally. 
The thousands of flags belonging to all the local groups in Germany were 
to be held in readiness behind the high fences surrounding the field. The 
flagbearers were to divide into ten columns, forming lanes in which the 
Amtswalter would march up. Since all this was to take place at evening, 
bright spotlights would be cast on these banners, and the great eagle 
crowning them all. That alone would have a dramatic effect. But even 
this did not seem sufficient to me. I had occasionally seen our new anti- 
aircraft searchlights blazing miles into the sky. I asked Hitler to let me 
have a hundred and thirty of these. Goering made a fuss at first, since 
these hundred and thirty searchlights represented the greater part of the 
strategic reserve. But Hitler won him over: "If we use them in such 



59 ) Architectural Megalomania 

large numbers for a thing like this, other countries will think we're 
swimming in searchlights." 

The actual effect far surpassed anything I had imagined. The hun- 
dred and thirty sharply defined beams, placed around the field at 
intervals of forty feet, were visible to a height of twenty to twenty-five 
thousand feet, after which they merged into a general glow. The feeling 
was of a vast room, with the beams serving as mighty pillars of infinitely 
high outer walls. Now and then a cloud moved through this wreath of 
lights, bringing an element of surrealistic surprise to the mirage. I 
imagine that this "cathedral of light" was the first luminescent architec- 
ture of this type, and for me it remains not only my most beautiful archi- 
tectural concept but, after its fashion, the only one which has survived 
the passage of time. "The effect, which was both solemn and beautiful, 
was like being in a cathedral of ice," British Ambassador Henderson 
wrote. 3 

When it came to cornerstone layings, there seemed no way to blot 
out the dignitaries, ministers, Reichsleiters, and Gauleiters, although these 
too were a less than impressive bunch. The parade marshals had all they 
could do to teach them to line up properly. When Hitler appeared they 
stiffened to attention and raised their arms in salute. At the cornerstone 
laying of the Nuremberg Kongresshalle, Hitler saw me standing in the 
second rank. He interrupted the solemn ceremonial to extend his hand 
to me. I was so overwhelmed by this unusual sign of favor that I let my 
own hand, raised in salute, fall with a loud smack on the bald head of 
Julius Streicher, the Gauleiter of Franconia, who stood just front of me. 

During the Nuremberg Party Rallies, Hitler remained out of sight 
most of the time, as far as his intimates were concerned. He withdrew 
either to prepare his speeches or to attend one of the numerous functions. 
He took special satisfaction in the foreign visitors and delegations who 
came each year in growing numbers, especially when these were from 
the democratic West. During his hasty lunches he asked to have their 
names read and was obviously pleased at the interest shown by the world 
at large in National Socialist Germany. 

I too had a strenuous time of it in Nuremberg, having been made 
responsible for all the buildings in which Hitler would appear in the 
course of the rally. As "chief decorator" I had to check on the arrange- 
ments shortly before the beginning of the function, then rush along to 
see to the next. At that time I dearly loved flags and used them wherever 
I could. They were a way of introducing a play of color into somber 
architecture. I found it a boon that the swastika flag Hitler had designed 
proved more amenable to these uses than a flag divided into three stripes 
of color. Of course it was not altogether consonant with the flag's dignity 
to use it mostly for decorative effect, for accenting the pleasing har- 
monies of certain fagades or covering ugly nineteenth-century buildings 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 60 

from eaves to sidewalks. Quite often I added gold ribbons to the flag to 
intensify the effect of the red. But it was always scenic drama I was after. 
I arranged for veritable orgies of flags in the narrow streets of Goslar and 
Nuremberg, with banners stretched from house to house, so that the sky 
was almost blotted out. 

With all this to attend to, I missed most of Hitler s rallies except for 
his "cultural speeches," as he himself called these major oratorical flights. 
He used to draft these while he was at Obersalzberg. At the time I 
admired the speeches not so much, I thought, for their rhetorical bril- 
liance as for what I felt to be their incisive content, their intellectual 
level. In Spandau I decided I would reread them, once my prison term 
was over, on the theory that I would find in them one element in my 
former world which would not repel me. But my expectations were dis- 
appointed. In the context of that time they had said a great deal to me; 
now they seemed empty, without tension, shallow and useless. What was 
more, in them Hitler openly aired his intention to pervert the very mean- 
ing of the concept of culture by mobilizing it for his own power goals. 
I found it incomprehensible that these tirades should once have im- 
pressed me so profoundly. What had done it? 

I also never missed the first event of the Party Rally, a performance 
of Die Meistersinger with the ensemble of the Berlin State Opera under 
Furtwangler. One might have expected that such a gala night, which 
could be matched only by the performances in Bayreuth, would have 
been jammed. Over a thousand leaders of the party received invitations 
and tickets, but they apparently preferred to investigate the quality of 
Nuremberg beer or Franconian wine. Each of them probably assumed 
that the others would do their duty for the party and sit out the opera— 
indeed, legend has it that the top leadership of the party was interested 
in music. But in fact the leading men in the party were on the whole dia- 
monds in the rough who had as little bent for classical music as for art and 
literature in general. Even the few representatives of the intelligentsia 
in Hitler s leadership, such as Goebbels, did not bother with such func- 
tions as the regular concerts of the Berlin Philharmonic under Furt- 
wangler. Of all the prominent personalities of the Third Reich, only 
Minister of the Interior Frick could be met at these concerts. Hitler, too, 
who seemed partial to music, went to the Berlin Philharmonic concerts 
only on rare official occasions after 1933. 

Given this background, it is understandable that the Nuremberg 
Opera House was almost empty in 1933 when Hitler entered the central 
box to hear Die Meistersinger. He reacted with intense vexation. Nothing 
he said, was so insulting and so difficult for an artist as playing to an 
empty house. He ordered patrols sent out to bring the high party func- 
tionaries from their quarters, beer halls, and cafes to the opera house; 
but even so the seats could not be filled. The following day many jokes 



6i ) Architectural Megalomania 

were told about where and how the missing leaders had been picked up. 

Next year Hitler explicitly ordered the party chiefs to attend the 
festival performance. They showed their boredom; many were visibly 
overpowered by sleep. Moreover, to Hitlers mind the sparse applause 
did not do justice to the brilliant performance. From 1935 on, therefore, 
the indifferent party audience was replaced by members of the public 
who had to buy their tickets for hard cash. Only then was the "atmo- 
sphere" as encouraging and the applause as hearty as Hitler required. 

Late at night I would return from my rounds to the Hotel Deutscher 
Hof, which had been reserved for Hitlers staff and for the Gauleiters 
and Reichsleiters. In the hotel restaurant I usually found a group of old 
Gauleiters waxing boisterous over their beer as they denounced the 
party's betrayal of the principles of the revolution and betrayal of the 
workers. Here was a sign that the ideas of Gregor Strasser, who had 
once led the anticapitalist wing within the NSDAP, were still alive, 
though reduced to mere bombast. Only in alcohol could these fellows 
resurrect their old revolutionary elan. 

In 1934 some military exercises were performed for the first time at 
the Party Rally, in Hitler's presence. That same evening Hitler officially 
visited the soldiers' bivouac. As a former corporal, he seemed thrown 
back into a world that was familiar to him. He mingled with the soldiers 
at the campfires, was surrounded by them, tossed jokes back and forth 
with them. He returned from this episode in a relaxed mood, and during 
a late snack, described it all with a good many telling details. 

The high command of the army, however, was by no means over- 
joyed. Army Adjutant Hossbach spoke of the soldiers' "breaches of dis- 
cipline." He insisted that such familiarities must be prevented in the 
future, since they infringed upon the dignity of the Chief of State. Hitler 
privately expressed annoyance with this criticism, but was ready to 
comply. I was astonished at his almost timid attitude in the face of these 
demands. But he must have felt he had to be careful of the army and 
have been still shaky in his role as Chief of State. 

During the preparations for the Party Rallies I met a woman who 
had impressed me even in my student days: Leni Riefenstahl, who had 
starred in or had directed well-known mountain and skiing movies. 
Hitler appointed her to make films of the rallies. As the only woman 
officially involved in the proceedings, she had frequent conflicts with the 
party organization, which was soon up in arms against her. The Nazis were 
by tradition antifeminist and could hardly brook this self-assured woman, 
the more so since she knew how to bend this men's world to her purposes. 
Intrigues were launched and slanderous stories carried to Hess, in order 
to have her ousted. But after the first Party Rally film, which convinced 
even the doubters of her skill as a director, these attacks ceased. 

When I was first introduced to her, she took a yellowed newspaper 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 62 

clipping from a little chest. "Three years ago, when you reconstructed 
the Gau headquarters, I clipped your picture from the newspaper," she 
said. Why in the world had she done that, I asked in astonishment. "I 
thought at the time that with your head you might well play a part. . . . 
In one of my movies, of course." 

I recall, incidentally, that the footage taken during one of the solemn 
sessions of the 1935 Party Congress was spoiled. At Leni RiefenstahTs 
suggestion Hitler gave orders for the shots to be refilmed in the studio. 
I was called in to do a backdrop simulating a section of the Kongresshalle, 
as well as a realistic model of the platform and lectern. I had spotlights 
aimed at it; the production staff scurried around— while Streicher, Rosen- 
berg, and Frank could be seen walking up and down with their manu- 
scripts, determinedly memorizing their parts. Hess arrived and was 
asked to pose for the first shot. Exactly as he had done before an audience 
of 30,000 at the Party Congress, he solemnly raised his hand. With his 
special brand of ardor, he turned precisely to the spot where Hitler would 
have been sitting, snapped to attention and cried: "My Leader, I wel- 
come you in the name of the Party Congress! The congress will now 
continue. The Fuehrer speaks!" 

He did it all so convincingly that from that point on I was no longer 
so sure of the genuineness of his feelings. The three others also gave 
excellent performances in the emptiness of the studio, proving themselves 
gifted actors. I was rather disturbed; Frau Riefenstahl, on the other hand, 
thought the acted scenes better than the original presentation. 

By this time I thoroughly admired the art with which Hitler would 
feel his way during his rallies until he had found the point to unleash 
the first great storm of applause. I was by no means unaware of the 
demagogic element; indeed I contributed to it myself by my scenic 
arrangements. Nevertheless, up to this time I had believed that the 
feelings of the speakers were genuine. It was therefore an upsetting dis- 
covery, that day in the studio, when I saw that all this emotion could be 
represented "authentically" even without an audience. 

For the buildings in Nuremberg I had in mind a synthesis between 
Troost's classicism and Tessenow's simplicity. I did not call it neo- 
classicist, but neoclassical, for I thought I had derived it from the Dorian 
style. I was deluding myself, deliberately forgetting that these buildings 
had to provide a monumental backdrop such as had already been at- 
tempted on the Champs de Mars in Paris during the French Revolution, 
although the resources at that time were more modest. Terms like "classi- 
cal" and "simple" were scarcely consonant with the gigantic proportions 
I employed in Nuremberg. Yet, to this day I still like my Nuremberg 
sketches best of all, rather than many others that I later prepared for 
Hitler and that turned out considerably more practical. 



63 ) Architectural Megalomania 

Because of my fondness for the Doric, when I went on my first trip 
abroad in May 1935, 1 did not go to Italy to see the Renaissance palaces 
and the colossal buildings of Rome, although these might have served me 
better as prototypes for what was wanted. Instead, I turned to Greece— 
a sign of where I considered my architectural allegiance to lie. My wife 
and I sought out chiefly examples of Doric buildings. I shall never forget 
how overwhelmed we were by the reconstructed stadium of Athens. Two 
years later, when I myself had to design a stadium, I borrowed its basic 
horseshoe form. 

In Delphi I thought I discerned how the purity of Greek artistic 
creativeness was speedily contaminated by the wealth won in the Ionian 
colonies in Asia. Didn't this prove how sensitive a high artistic conscious- 
ness was and how little it took to distort the ideal conception to the point 
of unrecognizability? I happily played with such theories; it never oc- 
cured to me that my own works might be subject to these same laws. 

When we came back in June 1935 my own house in Berlin- 
Schlachtensee was completed. It was of modest dimensions, 1345 square 
feet of living space comprising one dining room, one living room, and 
minimal bedrooms— in deliberate contrast to the recent habit among the 
leaders of the Reich, who were moving into huge villas or acquiring 
palaces. We wanted to avoid all that, for we had observed that in sur- 
rounding themselves with pomp and stiff officialism, these people were 
condemning themselves to a slow process of "petrifaction"— which in- 
volved their private lives as well. 

In any case I could not have built on any greater scale, since I 
lacked the means. My house cost seventy thousand marks; in order to 
swing it I had to ask my father to take a mortgage of thirty thousand 
marks. Although I was acting as a free-lance architect for the party and 
the state, my income remained low. For in an idealistic spirit which 
seemed to accord with the temper of the time, I had renounced any 
architect's fees for all my official buildings. 

This attitude, however, caused some amazement in party circles. 
One day in Berlin, Goering said to me in high good humor: "Well, Herr 
Speer, you have a great deal to do now, of course. You must be earning 
plenty." When I said that was not the case, he stared incredulously at 
me. "What's that? An architect as busy as you? I figured you for a couple 
of hundred thousand a year. That's all nonsense, this idealistic business. 
You must make money!" Thereafter I accepted the architect's fee, except 
for my Nuremberg buildings, for which I received a thousand marks a 
month. But it was not only on financial grounds that I clung to my pro- 
fessional independence and fended off an official post. Hitler had, I 
knew, much greater confidence in nonofficial architects— his prejudice 
against bureaucrats colored his views in everything. At the end of my 
career as an architect my fortune had increased to about one and a 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 64 

half million marks, and the Reich owed me another million that I did 
not collect. 

My family lived happily in this house. I wish I could write that I had 
a share in this familial happiness, as my wife and I had once dreamed. 
But by the time I arrived home, it would be late in the evening and the 
children would have long since been put to bed. I would sit with my 
wife for a while— silent from exhaustion. This kind of rigidity became 
more and more the norm, and when I consider the matter in retrospect, 
what was happening to me was no different from what was happening to 
the party bigwigs, who ruined their family life by their ostentatious style 
of living. They froze into poses of officialism. My own rigidity sprang from 
excessive work. 

In the autumn of 1934 0**° Meissner, state secretary in the Chancel- 
lery, who had served under Ebert and Hindenburg and now was working 
for his third Chief of State, telephoned me. I was to come to Weimar 
the next day in order to accompany Hitler to Nuremberg. 

I sat up until the wee hours sketching out ideas that had been 
exciting me for some time. More major construction for the Party 
Rallies was wanted: a field for military exercises, a large stadium, a hall 
for Hitler s cultural addresses and for concerts as well. Why not con- 
centrate all that, together with what already existed, into a great center? 
I thought. Until then I had not ventured to take the initiative on such 
questions, for Hitler kept this sort of decision for himself. I therefore went 
about drafting this plan with some hesitation. 

In Weimar, Hitler showed me a sketch for a "Party Forum" by Pro- 
fessor Paul Schultze-Naumburg. "It looks like an oversized marketplace 
for a provincial town," he commented. "There's nothing distinctive about 
it, nothing that sets it off from former times. If we are going to build a 
party forum, we want people centuries hence to be able to see that our 
times had a certain building style, like Konigsplatz in Munich, for 
example." Schultze-Naumburg, a pillar of the League of Struggle for 
German Culture, was given no chance to defend his proposal; he was 
not even called into Hitlers presence. With total disregard for the man's 
reputation, Hitler threw away the plans and ordered a new competition 
among various architects of his choice. 

We went on to Nietzsche's house where his sister, Frau Forster- 
Nietzsche, was expecting Hitler. This solitary, eccentric woman obviously 
could not get anywhere with Hitler; an oddly shallow conversation at 
cross-purposes ensued. The principle purpose of the meeting, however, 
was settled to the satisfaction of all parties: Hitler undertook to finance 
an annex to the old Nietzsche house, and Frau Forster-Nietzsche was 
willing to have Schultze-Naumburg design it. "He's better at that sort of 
thing, doing something in keeping with the old house," Hitler remarked. 
He was plainly pleased to be able to offer the architect some small sop. 



65 ) Architectural Megalomania 

Next morning we drove by car to Nuremberg, although Hitler pre- 
ferred the railroad at that period, for reasons that I was to learn that very 
day. As always he sat beside his driver in the dark-blue open seven-liter 
supercharged Mercedes; I was behind him on one jump seat, on the 
other his servant, who on request produced from a pouch automobile 
maps, crusty rolls, pills, or eyeglasses; in the rear sat his adjutant 
Bruckner and Press Chief Dietrich. In an accompanying car of the same 
size and color were five strong men of his bodyguard squad and Hitler's 
personal physician, Dr. Brandt. 

As soon as we had traversed the Thuringian Forest and come into 
more thickly settled areas, the difficulties began. Riding through a 
village, we were recognized; but before the people could recover from 
their astonishment we had passed them. "Now watch," Hitler said. "In 
the next village it won t be so easy. The local party group will certainly 
have telephoned ahead by now." Sure enough, when we arrived, the 
streets were full of cheering people. The village policeman was doing 
his best, but the car could advance no faster than a walk. Even after we 
had worked our way out, a few enthusiasts on the open highway let 
down the railroad barrier in order to keep Hitler among them a while 
longer. 

In this way we made slow progress. When it was time for lunch, we 
stopped at a small inn in Hildburgshausen where years before Hitler 
had had himself appointed police commissioner in order to acquire Ger- 
man citizenship. But no one mentioned this. The innkeeper and his wife 
were beside themselves with excitement. After some difficulty, the 
adjutant managed to elicit from them what they could serve: spaghetti 
with spinach. We waited for a long time; finally the adjutant went to 
take a look in the kitchen. "The women are in such a state that they 
can't tell whether the spaghetti is done." 

Meanwhile, thousands of people were gathering outside chanting 
calls for Hitler. "If only we were out of this," he commented when we 
emerged from the inn. Slowly, under a rain of flowers, we reached the 
medieval gate. Juveniles closed it before our eyes; children climbed on 
the running boards of the car. Hitler had to give autographs. Only then 
would they open the gate. They laughed, and Hitler laughed with them. 

Everywhere in the countryside farmers left their implements, 
women waved. It was a triumphal procession. As the car rolled along, 
Hitler leaned back to me and exclaimed: "Heretofore only one German 
has been hailed like this: Luther. When he rode through the country, 
people gathered from far and wide to cheer him. As they do for me 
today!" 

This enormous popularity was only too easy to understand. The 
public credited Hitler and no one else with the achievements in economics 
and foreign policy of the period. They more and more regarded him as the 
leader who had made a reality of their deeply rooted longings for a 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 66 

powerful, proud, united Germany. Very few were mistrustful at this 
time. And those who occasionally felt doubts rising reassured themselves 
with thoughts of the regime's accomplishments and the esteem it enjoyed 
even in critical foreign countries. 

During these stormy scenes of homage by the populace, which 
certainly affected me as well, there was one person in our car who re- 
fused to be carried away: Hitlers chauffeur of many years, Schreck. I 
heard some of his mutterings: "Folks are dissatisfied because . . . party 
people swellheaded . . . proud, forget where they come from. . . ." After 
his early death an oil painting of Schreck hung in Hitler s private office 
at Obersalzberg side by side with one of Hitlers mother 4 — there was 
none of his father. 

Shortly before we reached Bayreuth, Hitler shifted over to a small 
Mercedes sedan which was driven by his photographer Hoffmann and 
rode to Villa Wahnfried, where Frau Winifred Wagner was expecting 
him. We others went on to Berneck, the nearby spa where Hitler regularly 
spent the night on the drive from Munich to Berlin. In eight hours we had 
covered only a hundred and thirty miles. 

When I learned that Hitler would be staying at Wahnfried until 
quite late, I was in some embarrassment, for next morning we were to 
drive on to Nuremberg where Hitler might very possibly agree to the 
building program proposed by the municipal administration, which had 
its own axes to grind. If so, there was little prospect that my design would 
even be considered, for Hitler never liked to rescind a decision. Under 
the circumstances, I turned to Schreck. I explained my plan for the 
Party Rally area. He promised to tell Hitler about it during the drive and 
to show him the sketch if he reacted favorably. 

Next morning, shortly before we set out, I was called to Hitler s 
suite: "I agree to your plan. We'll discuss it today with Mayor Liebel." 

Two years later Hitler would have come directly to the point in 
dealing with a mayor: "Here is the plan for the Party Rally area; this is 
how we're going to do it." But at that time, in 1935, he did not yet feel 
so completely in command and so spent almost an hour in prefatory 
explanations, before he finally placed my sketch on the table. Naturally 
the mayor found the design excellent, for as an old party man he had 
been trained to concur. 

After my plan had been properly praised, Hitler again began 
feeling his way: The design called for moving the Nuremberg zoo. 
"Can we ask the people of Nuremberg to accept that? They're very 
attached to it, I know. Of course we'll pay for a new and even more 
beautiful zoo." 

The mayor, who was equally alert to protect the interests of his 
city, suggested: "We would have to call a stockholders' meeting, perhaps 
try to buy their shares. . . ." Hitler proved amenable to everything. Out- 



67 ) Architectural Megalomania 

side, Liebel, rubbing his hands, said to one of his aides: "I wonder why 
the Fuehrer spent so much time persuading us? Of course he can have 
the old zoo, and we'll get a new one. The old one was no good anyhow. 
We'll have the finest in the world. They're paying for it, after all." Thus 
the people of Nuremberg at least got their new zoo— the only thing in the 
plan which was ever carried to completion. 

That same day we took the train to Munich. That evening Adjutant 
Bruckner telephoned me: "You and your goddamned plans! Couldn't they 
keep? The Fuehrer didn't close an eye last night, he was so excited. Next 
time have the goodness to ask me first!" 

To build this giant complex an Association for the Nuremberg Party 
Rally Site was created. The Finance Minister of the Reich reluctantly 
assumed the duty of funding the project. Out of some whimsical impulse 
Hitler appointed Minister of Churches Kerrl to take charge of the associa- 
tion, and as the latter's deputy, Martin Bormann, who thus received 
his first important assignment outside the party secretariat. 

The plan called for an expenditure of between seven and eight 
hundred million marks on building, which today would cost three billion 
marks [$750,000,000]— eight years later I would be spending such a sum 
every four days on armaments. 5 Including the camping grounds for 
participants, the tract embraced an area of 16.5 square kilometers (about 
6.5 square miles). Under Kaiser Wilhelm II, incidentally, there had been 
plans for a "Center for German National Festivals" with an area 6600 by 
2000 feet. 

Two years after Hitler had approved it, my design was exhibited as 
a model at the Paris World's Fair of 1937 and won the Grand Prix. At 
the southern end of the complex was the Marchfield; the name was in- 
tended not only as a reference to the war god Mars, but also to the 
month in which Hitler introduced conscription.* Within this enormous 
tract, an area of 3400 by 2300 feet was set aside where the army could 
practice minor maneuvers. By contrast, the grandiose area of the palace 
of Kings Darius I and Xerxes in Persepolis (fifth century b.c.) had embraced 
only 1500 by 900 feet. Stands 48 feet high were to surround the entire 
area, providing seats for a hundred and sixty thousand spectators. Twenty- 
four towers over a hundred and thirty feet in height were to punctuate 
these stands; in the middle was a platform for guests of honor which was to 
be crowned by a sculpture of a woman. In a.d. 64 Nero erected on the 
Capitol a colossal figure 119 feet high. The Statue of Liberty in New York 
is 151 feet high; our statue was to be 46 feet higher. 

To the north, in the direction of the old Nuremberg castle of the 
Hohenzollerns, which could be seen in the distance, the Marchfield 

* It probably also referred to the National Assembly of the Franks, which was 
likewise called the Marchfield. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 68 

opened out into a processional avenue a mile and a quarter long and 264 
feet wide. The army was to march down this avenue in ranks 165 feet 
wide. This avenue was finished before the war and paved with heavy 
granite slabs, strong enough to bear the weight of tanks. The surface was 
roughened to provide a secure footing for the goose-stepping soldiers. On 
the right rose a flight of stairs from which Hitler, flanked by his generals, 
would review such parades. Opposite was a colonnade where the flags 
of the regiments would be displayed. 

This colonnade with its height of only sixty feet was to serve as a 
foil for the "Great Stadium" towering up behind it. Hitler had stipulated 
that the stadium was to hold four hundred thousand spectators. History's 
largest precedent was the Circus Maximus in Rome, built for between 
one hundred and fifty and two hundred thousand persons. Modern sta- 
diums in those days contained about a hundred thousand seats. 

The pyramid of Cheops, with a base of 756 feet and a height of 481 
feet, measured 3,277,300 cubic yards. The Nuremberg stadium would 
have been 1815 feet long and 1518 wide and could have enclosed a 
volume of over 11,100,000 cubic yards, some three times more than the 
pyramid of Cheops. 6 The stadium was to be by far the largest structure 
on the tract and one of the hugest in history. Calculations showed that in 
order to hold the required number of spectators the stands would have 
to be over three hundred feet high. An oval would really have been out 
of the question; the resultant bowl would not only have intensified the 
heat, but produced psychological discomfort. I therefore turned my 
thoughts to the Athenian horseshoe shape. We took a hillside of approxi- 
mately the same shape and smoothed out its irregularities by temporary 
wooden structures; the question was whether sporting events would be 
visible from the upper rows. The results of our study were more positive 
than I had expected. 

Our rough estimate of the costs of the Nuremberg stadium came to 
between two hundred and two hundred and fifty million marks— approxi- 
mately a billion marks [$250,000,000] at present-day construction costs. 
Hitler took this calmly. "That is less than two battleships of the Bismarck 
class. How quickly a warship can be destroyed, and if not, it is scrap-iron 
anyhow in ten years. But this building will stand for centuries. When the 
Finance Minister asks what it will cost, don t give him any answer. Say 
that nobody has any experience with building projects of such size." 
Granite to the value of several million marks was ordered, pink for the 
exteriors, white for the stands. At the site a gigantic pit for the founda- 
tion was dug; during the war it became a picturesque lake, which sug- 
gested the proportions of the structure. 

Farther to the north of the stadium the processional avenue crossed 
an expanse of water in which the buildings would be reflected. Then, 
concluding the complex, came a square, bounded on the right by the 



69 ) Architectural Megalomania 

Kongresshalle, which still stands, and on the left by a "Kulturhalle" meant 
specifically for Hitler s speeches on cultural matters. 

Hitler had appointed me the architect for all these buildings except 
the Kongresshalle, which had been designed in 1933 by Ludwig Ruff. 
He gave me a free hand with plans and execution and participated every 
year in a ceremonial cornerstone laying. However, these cornerstones 
were subsequently moved to the municipal buildings and grounds yard 
to wait until the building had made further progress and they could be 
incorporated in the wall. At the laying of the cornerstone for the stadium 
on September 9, 1937, Hitler solemnly shook hands with me before the 
assembled party bigwigs. "This is the greatest day of your life!" Perhaps 
I was something of a skeptic even then, for I replied: "No, not today, my 
Fuehrer, but only when the building is finished." 

Early in 1939 Hitler, in a speech to construction workers, undertook 
to justify the dimensions of his style: "Why always the biggest? I do this 
to restore to each individual German his self-respect. In a hundred areas 
I want to say to the individual: We are not inferior; on the contrary, we 
are the complete equals of every other nation." 7 

This love for vast proportions was not only tied up with the totali- 
tarian cast of Hitler's regime. Such tendencies, and the urge to demonstrate 
one's strength on all occasions, are characteristic of quickly acquired 
wealth. Thus we find the largest buildings in Greek antiquity in Sicily and 
Asia Minor. It is an interesting corollary that those cities were generally 
ruled by despots. But even in Periclean Athens the statue of Athena Par- 
thenos by Phidias was forty feet high. Moreover, most of the Seven Won- 
ders of the World won their repute by their excessive size: the Temple of 
Diana at Ephesus, the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, the Colossus of 
Rhodes, and the Olympian Zeus of Phidias. 

Hitler's demand for huge dimensions, however, involved more than 
he was willing to admit to the workers. He wanted the biggest of every- 
thing to glorify his works and magnify his pride. These monuments were 
an assertion of his claim to world dominion long before he dared to 
voice any such intention even to his closest associates. 

I, too, was intoxicated by the idea of using drawings, money, and 
construction firms to create stone witnesses to history, and thus affirm our 
claim that our works would survive for a thousand years. But I found 
Hitler's excitement rising whenever I could show him that at least in size 
we had "beaten" the other great buildings of history. To be sure, he never 
gave vent to these heady feelings. He was sparing in his use of high- 
sounding words to me. Possibly at such moments he actually felt a certain 
awe; but it was directed toward himself and toward his own greatness, 
which he himself had willed and projected into eternity. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 70 

At the same Party Rally of 1937 at which Hitler laid the cornerstone 
of the stadium, his last speech ended with the ringing words: "The Ger- 
man nation has after all acquired its Germanic Reich." At dinner after- 
ward Hitler s adjutant, Bruckner, reported that at these words Field 
Marshal von Blomberg had burst into tears from sheer emotion. Hitler 
took this as evidence of the army's assent to what was being promised in 
this slogan. 

At the time there was a great deal of talk to the effect that this mys- 
terious dictum would be ushering in a new era in foreign policy; that it 
would bear much fruit. I had an idea of what it meant, for shortly before 
the speech was given, Hitler one day abruptly stopped me on the stairs 
to his apartment, let his entourage go on ahead, and said: "We will create 
a great empire. All the Germanic peoples will be included in it. It will 
begin in Norway and extend to northern Italy. I myself must carry this 
out. If only I keep my healthr 

That was still a relatively restrained formulation. In the spring of 
1937 Hitler visited me at my Berlin showrooms. We stood alone in front 
of the nearly seven-foot high model of the stadium for four hundred 
thousand people. It had been set up precisely at eye level. Every detail 
had been rendered, and powerful spotlights illuminated it, so that with 
only a little imagination we could conceive the effect of this structure. 
Alongside the model were the plans, pinned up on boards. Hitler turned 
to these. We talked about the Olympic Games, and I pointed out, as I 
had done several times before, that my athletic field did not have the 
prescribed Olympic proportions. Without any change of tone, as if it 
were a matter settled beyond the possibility of discussion, Hitler ob- 
served: "No matter. In 1940 the Olympic Games will take place in Tokyo. 
But thereafter they will take place in Germany for all time to come, in 
this stadium. And then we will determine the measurements of the 
athletic field." 

According to our carefully worked out schedule this stadium was 
supposed to be completed in time for the Party Rally of 1945. . . . 



6 



The Greatest Assignment 



Hitler was pacing back and forth in the garden at obersalzberg. 
"I really don't know what I should do. It is a terribly difficult decision. I 
would by far prefer to join the English. But how often in history the 
English have proved perfidious. If I go with them, then everything is 
over for good between Italy and us. Afterward the English will drop me, 
and we'll sit between two stools." In the autumn of 1935 he made fre- 
quent remarks of this sort to his intimate circle, which as always had 
accompanied him to Obersalzberg. At this point Mussolini had begun his 
invasion of Abyssinia, accompanied by massive air raids; the Negus had 
fled and a new Roman Empire proclaimed. 

Ever since Hitler had made his unfortunate visit to Italy in June 1934, 
he distrusted the Italians and Italian policy, though not Mussolini. Now 
that he saw his doubts reinforced, Hitler recalled an item in Hindenburg's 
political testament, to the effect that Germany should never again ally 
herself with Italy. Under England's leadership the League of Nations im- 
posed economic sanctions on Italy. This was the moment, Hitler remarked, 
when he had to decide whether he should ally himself with the English 
or the Italians. The decision must be taken in terms of the long view, he 
said. He spoke of his readiness to guarantee England's empire in return 
for a global arrangement— a favorite idea of his, which he was to voice 
often. But circumstances left him no choice. They forced him to decide in 
favor of Mussolini. In spite of the ideological relationship and the devel- 

(71) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 72 

oping personal tie, that was no easy decision. For days afterward Hitler 
would remark in somber tones that the situation had forced him to take 
this step. He was all the more gratified when it turned out a few weeks 
later that the sanctions as ultimately voted were relatively mild. From 
this Hitler concluded that both England and France were loath to take 
any risks and anxious to avoid any danger. Actions of his which later 
seemed reckless followed directly from such observations. The Western 
governments had, as he commented at the time, proved themselves weak 
and indecisive. 

He found this view confirmed when the German troops marched into 
the demilitarized Rhineland on March 7, 1936. This was an open breach 
of the Treaty of Locarno and might have provoked military counter- 
measures on the part of the Allies. Nervously, Hitler waited for the first 
reactions. The special train in which we rode to Munich on the evening 
of that day was charged, compartment after compartment, with the tense 
atmosphere that emanated from the Fuehrer's section. At one station a 
message was handed into the car. Hitler sighed with relief: "At last! The 
King of England will not intervene. He is keeping his promise. That 
means it can all go well." He seemed not to be aware of the meager influ- 
ence the British Crown has upon Parliament and the government. Never- 
theless, military intervention would have probably required the King's 
approval, and perhaps this was what Hitler meant to imply. In any case, 
he was intensely anxious, and even later, when he was waging war against 
almost the entire world, he always termed the remilitarization of the 
Rhineland the most daring of all his undertakings. "We had no army 
worth mentioning; at that time it would not even have had the fighting 
strength to maintain itself against the Poles. If the French had taken any 
action, we would have been easily defeated; our resistance would have 
been over in a few days. And what air force we had then was ridiculous. 
A few Junkers 52's from Lufthansa, and not even enough bombs for them." 
After the abdication of King Edward VIII, later, the Duke of Windsor, 
Hitler frequently referred to his apparent friendliness toward National 
Socialist Germany: "I am certain that through him permanent friendly 
relations with England could have been achieved. If he had stayed, 
everything would have been different. His abdication was a severe loss 
for us." Whereupon he would launch into remarks about sinister anti- 
German forces who were deciding the course of British policy. His regret 
at not having made an ally out of England ran like a red thread through 
all the years of his rule. It increased when the Duke of Windsor and his 
wife visited Hitler at Obersalzberg on October 22, 1937, and allegedly had 
good words to say about the achievements of the Third Reich. 

A few months after the uncontested remilitarization of the Rhine- 
land, Hitler exulted over the harmonious atmosphere that prevailed dur- 
ing the Olympic Games. International animosity toward National Socialist 



73 ) The Greatest Assignment 

Germany was plainly a thing of the past, he thought. He gave orders that 
everything should be done to convey the impression of a peace-minded 
Germany to the many prominent foreign guests. He himself followed the 
athletic contests with great excitement. Each of the German victories— 
and there were a surprising number of these— made him happy, but he 
was highly annoyed by the series of triumphs by the marvelous colored 
American runner, Jesse Owens. People whose antecedents came from 
the jungle were primitive, Hitler said with a shrug; their physiques were 
stronger than those of civilized whites. They represented unfair competi- 
tion and hence must be excluded from future games. Hitler was also 
jolted by the jubilation of the Berliners when the French team filed 
solemnly into the Olympic Stadium. They had marched past Hitler with 
raised arms and thereby sent the crowd into transports of enthusiasm. But 
in the prolonged applause Hitler sensed a popular mood, a longing for 
peace and reconciliation with Germany's western neighbor. If I am cor- 
rectly interpreting Hitler's expression at the time, he was more disturbed 
than pleased by the Berliners' cheers. 

In the spring of 1936 Hitler took me with him to inspect a stretch of 
the autobahn. In conversation he dropped the remark: "I have one more 
building assignment to give out. The greatest of all." There was only this 
one hint. He did not explain. 

Occasionally, it was true, he outlined a few of his ideas for the re- 
building of Berlin, but it was not until June that Hitler showed me a 
plan for the center of the city. "I patiently explained to the mayor why 
this new avenue must be a hundred and thirty yards wide, and now he 
presents me with one only a hundred yards wide." A few weeks later 
Mayor Lippert, an old party member and editor in chief of the Berlin 
Angriff, was summoned again; but nothing had changed; the avenue was 
still a hundred yards in width. Lippert could not work up any enthusiasm 
for Hitler s architectural ideas. At first Hitler was merely annoyed, remark- 
ing that Lippert was petty, incapable of governing a metropolis, and even 
more incapable of understanding the historical importance he planned to 
give it. As time wore on, these remarks mounted in intensity: "Lippert is 
an incompetent, an idiot, a failure, a zero." What was astonishing, how- 
ever, was that Hitler never showed his dissatisfaction in the mayor's 
presence and never tried to win him over to his views. Even in this early 
period he sometimes shied away from the wearisome business of explain- 
ing reasons. After four years of this sort of thing, and right after a walk 
from the Berghof to the teahouse, during which he once more brooded 
over Lippert's stupidity, he telephoned Goebbels and categorically or- 
dered him to replace his mayor. 

Until the summer of 1936 Hitler had evidently meant to have his 
plans for Berlin carried out by the municipal government. Now he sent 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 74 

for me and tersely gave me the assignment: "There's nothing to be done 
with the Berlin city government. From now on you make the plans. Take 
this drawing along. When you have something ready, show it to me. As 
you know, I always have time for such things." 

As Hitler told me, his conception of an enormously wide avenue 
went back to the early twenties, when he began to study the various 
plans for Berlin, found them all inadequate, and was impelled to develop 
his own ideas.* Even then, he said, he had decided to shift the Anhalter 
and Potsdam railroad stations to the south of Tempelhof Field. This 
would release broad strips of trackage in the center of the city, so that 
with only a little further clearing, starting from the Siegesallee, a magnifi- 
cent avenue lined with impressive buildings could be built, three miles 
long. 

To be sure, all the architectural proportions of Berlin would be shat- 
tered by two buildings that Hitler envisaged on this new avenue. On the 
northern side, near the Reichstag, he wanted a huge meeting hall, a 
domed structure into which St. Peter s Cathedral in Rome would have 
fitted several times over. The diameter of the dome was to be eight 
hundred twenty-five feet. Beneath it, in an area of approximately four 
hundred and ten thousand square feet, there would be room for more 
than a hundred and fifty thousand persons to assemble standing. 

During these first discussions, when our general views on the city 
plan were still fluid, Hitler thought it necessary to explain to me that the 
size of meeting halls should be governed by medieval conceptions. The 
cathedral of Ulm, for example, had thirty thousand square feet of area; 
but when the building was begun in the fourteenth century only fifteen 
thousand people lived in Ulm, including children and the aged. "There- 
fore they could never fill the space. Compared to that, a hall for a 
hundred fifty thousand persons could be called small for a city of millions 
like Berlin." 

To balance this structure Hitler wanted an arch of triumph four 
hundred feet high. "At least that will be a worthy monument to our dead 
of the world war. The names of our dead, all 1,800,000 of them, will be 
chiseled in the granite. What a paltry affair the Berlin monument put up 
by the Republic is. How wretched and undignified for a great nation." He 
handed me two sketches drawn on small cards. "I made these drawings 
ten years ago. I've always saved them, because I never doubted that some 
day I would build these two edifices. And this is how we will carry it 
out now." 

* He was probably referring to the plans by Martin Machler which were shown 
in 1927 at a major art exhibit in Berlin. As a matter of fact these bear a striking 
resemblance to Hitler's ideas. I did not become acquainted with them until I read 
Alfred Schinz's book, Berlin: Stadtschicksal und Stadtehau (Braunschweig, 1964) 
in Spandau prison. 



75 ) The Greatest Assignment 

The proportions of the drawings showed, Hitler explained, that even 
then he had intended a diameter of more than six hundred and fifty feet 
for the dome and a height of more than three hundred thirty feet for the 
arch of triumph. What is startling is less the grandiosity of the project 
than the obsessiveness with which he had been planning triumphant mon- 
umental buildings when there was not a shred of hope that they could 
ever be built. And today it strikes me as rather sinister that in the midst 
of peacetime, while continually proclaiming his desire for international 
reconciliation, he was planning buildings expressive of an imperial glory 
which could be won only by war. 

"Berlin is a big city, but not a real metropolis. Look at Paris, the 
most beautiful city in the world. Or even Vienna. Those are cities with 
grand style. Berlin is nothing but an unregulated accumulation of build- 
ings. We must surpass Paris and Vienna." These were some of the points 
he made during the series of discussions that now began. Most of the time 
we conferred in his apartment in the Chancellery. As a rule, he would 
have all other guests leave, so we could talk seriously. 

At an earlier stage in his life he had carefully studied the plans of 
Vienna and Paris, and he revealed an amazing memory for these. In 
Vienna he admired the architectural complex of Ringstrasse with its great 
buildings, the Rathaus, the Parliament, the Concert Hall, or the Hofburg 
and the twin museums. He could draw this part of the city in correct pro- 
portions and had absorbed the lesson that impressive public buildings, like 
monuments, must be planned to be freely visible from all sides. He ad- 
mired these buildings even if they did not directly coincide with his 
views, like the neo-Gothic Rathaus. "Here Vienna is worthily repre- 
sented. By contrast, consider the Berlin Rathaus. We will give Berlin a 
more beautiful one than Vienna's, no doubt about that." 

He was even more impressed by the vast rebuilding project and the 
new boulevards that Georges E. Haussmann had built in Paris between 
1853 and 1870 at an expenditure of 2.5 million gold francs. He regarded 
Haussmann as the greatest city planner in history, but hoped that I 
would surpass him. The struggles that Haussmann had waged for years 
led him to expect that the plans for Berlin would also encounter opposi- 
tion. Only his authority, he believed, would successfully put the work 
across. 

Initially, however, he found a cunning way to bring the municipal 
administration around; for the city was less than eager to accept Hitlers 
plans when it became evident that the considerable expense of clearing 
ground and building the avenues, the public gardens, and the rapid- 
transit railways would fall to the city. 'We'll let them think we're con- 
sidering building our new capital on the Muritzsee in Mecklenburg. 
You'll see how the Berliners come to life at the threat that the federal 
government may move out/' he remarked. And in fact a few hints of this 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 76 

sort sufficed; the city fathers soon proved ready to foot the costs of the 
architectural planning. Nevertheless, for a few months Hitler was rather 
taken with this plan for a German Washington, and liked to talk about 
creating an ideal city out of nothingness. In the end, however, he rejected 
the idea: "Artificially created capitals always remain lifeless. Think of 
Washington or Canberra. In our own Karlsruhe, too, no life springs up 
because the dull bureaucrats are left to themselves there/' In connection 
with this episode, I am not certain to this day whether Hitler was play- 
acting as well, or whether for a while he was not somewhat converted to 
this idea of a new city. 

His plans for Berlin were inspired by the Champs Elysees with its 
Arc de Triomphe, a hundred and sixty feet high, begun by Napoleon I 
in 1805. This was the model for his great arch and for the width of his 
avenue as well: "The Champs Elysees is three hundred and thirty feet 
wide. In any case we'll make our avenue seventy-odd feet wider. When 
the far-sighted Great Elector laid out Unter den Linden in the seventeenth 
century with a width of two hundred feet, he could no more have fore- 
seen present-day traffic than Haussmann when he designed the Champs 
Elysees." 

To carry out this project, Hitler had State Secretary Lammers issue an 
ordinance giving me extensive powers and making me his direct subordi- 
nate. Neither the Minister of the Interior nor the Mayor of Berlin nor the 
Gauleiter of Berlin, Goebbels, had any authority over me. In fact, Hitler 
explicitly exempted me from having to inform the city government or the 
party of my plans. 1 When I told Hitler that I preferred to carry out this 
commission also as a free-lance architect, he immediately consented. State 
Secretary Lammers invented a legal device which took account of my 
distaste for a bureaucratic position. My office was not treated as a part of 
the government, but as a large, independent research institute. 

On January 30, 1937, I was officially commissioned to carry out Hit- 
lers "greatest architectural task." For a long time he searched for a re- 
sounding enough title for me. Finally Funk hit on a good one: "Inspector 
General of Buildings for the Renovation of the Federal Capital." In pre- 
senting me with the certification of my appointment, Hitler manifested a 
kind of shyness which sometimes came over him. After lunch he pressed 
the document into my hand: "Do a good job." By a generous interpreta- 
tion of my contract I thereafter held the formal rank of a state secretary 
of the Reich government. At the age of thirty-two I could sit beside Dr. 
Todt in the third row of the government benches, was entitled to a place 
at the lower end of the table at official state dinners and automatically re- 
ceived from every foreign state visitor a decoration of fixed rank. I also 
received a monthly salary of fifteen hundred marks, an insignificant sum 
compared to my architect's fees. 

In February, moreover, Hitler bluntly ordered the Minister of Educa- 



77 ) The Greatest Assignment 

tion to clear out the venerable Academy of Arts on Pariser Platz, so that 
my offices— called GBI for Generalbauinspektor (Inspector General of 
Buildings)— could be installed there. He chose this building because he 
could reach it through the intervening ministerial gardens without being 
seen by the public. Soon he made ample use of this convenience. 

Hitler's city plan had one major fault: It had not been thought 
through to the end. He had become so set on the notion of a Berlin 
Champs Elysees two and a half times the length of the original in Paris 
that he entirely lost sight of the structure of existing Berlin, a city of four 
million people. For a city planner such an avenue could only have a 
meaning and function as the core of a general reorganization of the city. 
For Hitler, however, it was a display piece and an end in itself. Moreover, 
it did not solve the Berlin railroad problem. The huge wedge of tracks 
which divided the city into two parts would merely be shifted a few 
miles to the south. 

Ministerial Director Leibbrand of the Reich Traffic Ministry, the 
chief planner for the German railroads, saw in Hitler s plans an oppor- 
tunity for a large-scale reorganization of the entire railroad network in 
the capital. Together, we found an almost ideal solution. The capacity of 
the Berlin suburban railroad, the Ringbahn, would be expanded by two 
tracks, so that long-distance traffic could also be tunneled into it. We 
could thus have a central station in the north and another in the south, 
which would do away with the need for the various Berlin terminals. The 
cost of the new arrangement was estimated at between one and two bil- 
lion marks. 2 

This would give us the old tracks to the south for a prolongation of 
our avenue and a large open area in the heart of the city for new housing 
for four hundred thousand persons. 3 We could do the same to the north 
as well, and by eliminating the Lehrter Station open up new residential 
districts. The only trouble with this plan was that neither Hitler nor I 
wanted to give up the domed hall, which was to form the terminus of the 
magnificent avenue. The vast square in front of the hall was to remain free 
of traffic. So the plan, which would also have been a boon to traffic, was 
sacrificed on the altar of ostentation, and the flow of north-south traffic 
considerably hampered by a detour. 

It was an obvious idea to continue the existing two hundred foot wide 
thoroughfare to the west, Heerstrasse, with the same width in an easterly 
direction-a project that was partly realized after 1945 by the extension of 
the former Frankfurter Allee. This axis, like the north-south axis, would 
be continued to its natural terminus, the ring formed by the autobahn, so 
that new urban areas could also be opened up in the eastern part of Ber- 
lin. In this way, even though we were razing the heart of the city, we 
would be able to provide room for almost double the city's population. 4 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 78 

Both axes were to be lined by tall office buildings which would be 
scaled down at either end, passing by degrees into lower and lower 
buildings until an area was reached of private homes surrounded by 
considerable greenery. By this system I hoped to avoid the usual strangu- 
lation of the city center. This plan, which arose necessarily out of my axial 
structure, led the areas of greenery along the radii deep into the heart of 
the city. 

Beyond the autobahn, at the four terminal points of the two great 
spokes, land was reserved for airports. In addition, the Rangsdorfer 
Lake was expected to serve as landing field for a water airport, for in 
those days a greater future was envisaged for the seaplane. Tempelhof 
Airfield, situated much too close to the prospective new center of the 
city, would be turned into an amusement park in the style of Copen- 
hagen's Tivoli. In years to come, we considered, the intersecting axes 
would be supplemented by five rings and seventeen radial thorough- 
fares, each of which was to be two hundred feet wide. For the present, 
however, we limited ourselves to determining where the new rows of 
buildings were to go. To connect the midpoint of the axes and part 
of the rings and to relieve traffic in the streets, rapid-transit subways 
were planned. In the west, bordering on the Olympic Stadium, we plan- 
ned a new university quarter, for most of the buildings of the old Fried- 
rich Wilhelm University on Unter den Linden were antiquated and in 
deplorable condition. To the north of the new university district a new 
medical quarter was to be established, with hospitals, laboratories, and 
medical schools. The banks of the Spree between the museum island and 
the Reichstag— a neglected area full of junkyards and small factories- 
were also to be reconstructed and additions and new buildings for the 
Berlin museums undertaken. 

The land beyond the ring formed by the autobahn was to be set 
aside for recreation purposes. The typical Brandenburg pine forest of the 
area had been given into the charge of a high official in the Forestry 
Bureau who took his orders from me. Instead of pines, a woodland of 
deciduous trees was to be established here. After the model of the Bois 
de Boulogne, Grunewald was to be provided with hiking paths, rest 
areas, restaurants, and athletic fields for the capital's millions. The work 
had already begun. I had tens of thousands of deciduous trees planted, 
in order to restore the old mixed forest which Frederick the Great had 
cut for lumber to finance the Silesian War. Of the whole vast project for 
the reshaping of Berlin, these deciduous trees are all that have remained. 

In the course of the work a new urban concept emerged from Hitler's 
initially pointless plan for a grand avenue. In the light of all this, his 
original idea seemed relatively insignificant. At least where urban re- 
newal was concerned, I had gone far beyond Hitler's megalomaniacal 
notions. I imagine that this had rarely happened to him in the course of 
his life. He went along with all these expansions of the original idea and 



79 ) The Greatest Assignment 

gave me a free hand, but he could not really work up much enthusiasm 
for this part of the project. He would look at the plans, but really only 
glance at them, and after a few minutes would ask with palpable bore- 
dom: "Where do you have the plans for the grand avenue?" Then he 
would revel in visions of ministries, office buildings and showrooms for 
major German corporations, a new opera house, luxury hotels, and amuse- 
ment palaces— and I gladly joined in these visions. Nevertheless, I con- 
sidered these official buildings as subsidiary to the total plan; Hitler 
did not. His passion for building for eternity left him without a spark of 
interest in traffic arrangements, residential areas, and parks. He was in- 
different to the social dimension. 

Hess, on the other hand, was interested only in the residential struc- 
tures and scarcely took notice of the representational aspect of our plans. 
At the end of one of his visits he chided me for putting too much empha- 
sis on the latter. I promised him that for every brick used for these osten- 
tatious buildings, I would use one for a residential structure. Hitler was 
rather annoyed when he heard of this bargain; he spoke of the urgency 
of his requirements but did not cancel our arrangement. 

It has been generally assumed that I was Hitler's chief architect, to 
whom all others were subordinate. This was not so. The architects for 
the replanning of Munich and Linz had similar powers bestowed upon 
them. In the course of time Hitler consulted an ever-growing number of 
architects for special tasks. Before the war began, there must have been 
ten or twelve. 

When buildings were in question, Hitler repeatedly displayed his 
ability to grasp a sketch quickly and to combine the floor plan and render- 
ings into a three-dimensional conception. Despite all his government busi- 
ness and although he was often dealing with anywhere from ten to fifteen 
large buildings in different cities, whenever the drawings were presented 
to him again— often after an interval of months— he immediately found his 
bearings and could remember what changes he had asked for. Those who 
assumed that a request or a suggestion had long since been forgotten 
quickly learned otherwise. 

In these conferences he usually behaved with restraint and civility. 
He asked for changes amiably and without any note of insult— entirely in 
contrast to the domineering tone he took toward his political associates. 
Convinced that the architect should be responsible for his building, he 
encouraged the architect to do the talking, not the Gauleiter or Reichs- 
leiter who accompanied him. For he did not want any nonprofessional 
higher authority snarling up the explanations. If the architect's ideas ran 
counter to his own, Hitler was not stubborn: "Yes, you're right, that's 
better." 

The result was that I too was left with the feeling of creative inde- 
pendence. I frequently had differences of opinion with Hitler, but I can- 
not recall a single case in which he forced me as the architect to adopt his 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 80 

view. This comparatively equal relationship is the reason why later on, as 
Minister of Armaments, I assumed greater initiative than the majority of 
ministers and field marshals. 

Hitler reacted obstinately and ungraciously only when he sensed a 
mute opposition based on antagonistic principles. Thus Professor Bonatz, 
the teacher of a whole generation of architects, received no more com- 
missions after he had criticized Troost's new buildings on Munich's 
Konigsplatz. Bonatz was in such disfavor that even Todt did not dare 
consult him for the building of a few bridges on the autobahn. Only my 
intervening with Frau Troost brought Bonatz back into currency. "Why 
shouldn't he build bridges?" she remarked to Hitler. "He's very good on 
technical structures." Her word was weighty enough, and thereafter 
Bonatz built autobahn bridges. 

Hitler declared again and again: "How I wish I had been an archi- 
tect." And when I responded: "But then I would have no client," he would 
say: "Oh, you, you would have made your way in any case!" I sometimes 
ask myself whether Hitler would have forsaken his political career if in 
the early twenties he had met a wealthy client willing to employ him as 
architect. But at bottom, I think, his sense of political mission and his 
passion for architecture were always inseparable. It seems to me that 
this theory is borne out by the two sketches he made around 1925, when 
at the age of thirty-six his political career had been virtually wrecked— 
for certainly it must then have seemed a wild absurdity that he would 
ever be a political leader who could crown his success with a triumphal 
arch and a domed hall. 

The German Olympic Committee was thrown into a quandary when 
State Secretary Pfundtner of the Ministry of the Interior showed Hitler 
its first plans for the rebuilding of the Olympic Stadium. Otto March, the 
architect, had designed a concrete structure with glass partition walls, 
similar to the Vienna Stadium. Hitler went to inspect the site and came 
back in a state of anger and agitation. Having been summoned to discuss 
some plans with him, I was present when he curtly informed State Secre- 
tary Pfundtner to cancel the Olympic Games. They could not take place 
without his presence, he said, since the Chief of State must open them. 
But he would never set foot inside a modern glass box like that. 

Overnight I made a sketch showing how the steel skeleton already 
built could be clad in natural stone and have more massive cornices 
added. The glass partitions were eliminated, and Hitler was content. He 
saw to the financing of the increased costs; Professor March agreed to 
the changes, and the Olympic Games were held in Berlin after all— 
although I was never sure whether Hitler would actually have carried 
out his threat or whether it was merely a flash of pique, which he often 
used to get his way. 



81 ) The Greatest Assignment 

Hitler also abruptly threatened withdrawal from the Paris World's 
Fair of 1937, although the invitation had already been accepted and the 
site for the German pavilion fixed. He strongly disliked all the sketches he 
was shown. The Ministry of Economics thereupon asked me for a design. 
The Soviet Russian and German pavilions were to be placed directly op- 
posite one another on the fairgrounds; the French directors of the fair had 
deliberately arranged this confrontation. While looking over the site in 
Paris, I by chance stumbled into a room containing the secret sketch of 
the Soviet pavilion. A sculptured pair of figures thirty-three feet tall, on a 
high platform, were striding triumphantly toward the German pavilion. 
I therefore designed a cubic mass, also elevated on stout pillars, which 
seemed to be checking this onslaught, while from the cornice of my tower 
an eagle with the swastika in its claws looked down on the Russian sculp- 
tures. I received a gold medal for the building; so did my Soviet col- 
league. 

At the dedication dinner for our pavilion I met the French ambassa- 
dor to Berlin, Andre Fran9ois-Poncet. He proposed that I exhibit my 
works in Paris in exchange for a show of modern French painting in Ber- 
lin. French architecture was lagging, he commented, "but in painting you 
can learn from us." At the next opportunity I told Hitler of this proposal, 
which might open the way for me to win an international reputation. 
Hitler passed over the ambassador's unwelcome comment in silence, but 
for the moment said neither yes nor no. The upshot was that I could never 
bring up the subject again. 

During those days in Paris I saw the Palais de Chaillot and the Palais 
des Musees d'Art Moderne, as well as the Musee des Travaux Publics, 
then still being built, which had been designed by the famous avant- 
gardist August Perret. It surprised me that France also favored neo- 
classicism for her public buildings. It has often been asserted that this 
style is characteristic of the architecture of totalitarian states. That is not 
at all true. Rather, it was characteristic of the era and left its impress 
upon Washington, London, and Paris as well as Rome, Moscow, and our 
plans for Berlin. 5 

We had obtained some extra French currency. My wife and I drove 
by car through France with some friends. Slowly, we toured southward, 
stopping at castles and cathedrals on the way. We reached Carcassonne 
and found it highly stirring and romantic, although it was merely one of 
the most utilitarian fortifications of the Middle Ages, as typical of its time 
as an atomic shelter is of ours. In the citadel hotel we enjoyed an old 
French red wine and decided to linger in the region for a few days more. 
In the evening I was called to the telephone. I had thought myself safe in 
this remote corner of France from Hitler's adjutants, all the more so since 
nobody knew our destination. 

For reasons of security and control, however, the French police had 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 82 

checked our movements. At any rate, in response to an inquiry from 
Obersalzberg they were able to say at once where we were. Adjutant 
Bruckner was on the phone: "You're to come to the Fuehrer by tomorrow 
noon." I objected that it would take me two and a half days to drive back. 
"A conference has been set for tomorrow afternoon, ,, Bruckner replied, 
"and the Fuehrer insists on your presence." I tried one more feeble pro- 
test. "Just a moment .... Yes, the Fuehrer knows where you are, but you 
must be here tomorrow." 

I was wretched, angry, and perplexed. Lengthy telephone calls with 
Hitlers pilot produced the news that the Fuehrers private plane could 
not land in France. But a place would be obtained for me on a German 
cargo plane that was due for a stopover in Marseilles, on a flight from 
Africa, at six o'clock in the morning. Hitlers special plane would then take 
me from Stuttgart to Aiming Airport near Berchtesgaden. 

That same night we set out on the drive to Marseilles. For a few 
minutes we looked at the Roman buildings in Aries, which had been the 
actual goal of our journey, by moonlight. At two o'clock in the morning 
we reached a hotel in Marseilles. Three hours later I was off to the air- 
port, and in the afternoon I presented myself, as ordered, to Hitler in 
Obersalzberg. "Oh yes, I'm sorry, Herr Speer, I've postponed the confer- 
ence. I wanted to have your opinion on a suspension bridge for Ham- 
burg." Dr. Todt had been supposed to show him the design for a mam- 
moth bridge that would surpass San Francisco's Golden Gate Bridge. 
Since construction was not due to begin until the nineteen-forties, Hitler 
might easily have let me have another week's vacation. 

Another time I had fled to the Zugspitze with my wife when the 
usual telephone call from the adjutant reached me: "You're to come to 
the Fuehrer. Dinner tomorrow afternoon in the Osteria." He cut off my 
objections: "No, it's urgent." In the Osteria, Hitler greeted me with: "Why, 
how nice that you've come to dine with us. What, you were sent for? I 
merely asked yesterday: I wonder where Speer is? But you know, it serves 
you right. What's this about going skiing with all you have to do?" 

Von Neurath displayed more backbone. Once when Hitler told his 
adjutant late one evening: "I'd like to talk to the Foreign Minister," he 
received the reply: "The Foreign Minister has already gone to bed."— 
'Tell them he's to be waked when I want to talk to him." Another tele- 
phone call; the adjutant returned discomfited: "The Foreign Minister says 
he will be available in the morning; he's tired now and wants to sleep." 

Faced with such resolution, Hitler could only give up, but he was in 
bad humor for the rest of the evening. Moreover, he could never forget 
such defiance and took revenge at the first opportunity. 



7 

Obersalzberg 



There is a special trap for every holder of power, whether the 
director of a company, the head of a state, or the ruler of a dictatorship. 
His favor is so desirable to his subordinates that they will sue for it by 
every means possible. Servility becomes endemic among his entourage, 
who compete among themselves in their show of devotion. This in turn 
exercises a sway upon the ruler, who becomes corrupted in his turn. 

The key to the quality of the man in power is how he reacts to 
this situation. I have observed a number of industrialists and military 
men who knew how to fend off this danger. Where power has been exer- 
cised over generations, a kind of hereditary incorruptibility grows up. 
Only a few individuals among those around Hitler, such as Fritz Todt, 
withstood the temptation to sycophancy. Hitler himself put up no visible 
resistance to the evolution of a court. 

The special conditions of his style of rule led Hitler, especially after 
1937, into increasing isolation. Added to that was his inability to make 
human contacts. Among his intimates we sometimes spoke of the change 
which was more and more marked in him. Heinrich Hoffmann had just 
put out a new edition of his book, Hitler, wie ihn keiner kennt ( The Hitler 
Nobody Knows). The old edition had to be withdrawn because of a pic- 
ture showing Hitler amicably together with Roehm, whom he was shortly 
afterward to kill. Hitler himself selected the new photos. They showed a 
casual, good-natured private individual in leather shorts, in a rowboat, 

(83) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 84 

stretched out on meadows, hiking, surrounded by enthusiastic young 
people, or in artists' studios. He was always seen relaxed, friendly, and 
accessible. The book proved to be Hoffmanns greatest success. But it 
was already out of date by the time it was published. For the genial, 
relaxed Hitler whom I too had known in the early thirties had become, 
even to his intimate entourage, a forbidding despot with few human 
relationships. 

In the Ostertal, a remote mountain valley in the Bavarian Alps, I had 
located a small hunting lodge, big enough to set up drawing boards, 
which with a bit of crowding could accommodate my family and a 
few associates. There, in the spring of 1935, we worked away at my plans 
for Berlin. That was a happy period for my work and for the family. 
But one day I made a crucial error; I told Hitler about this idyll. His 
response was: "Why, you can have all that and more near me. I'll put 
the Bechstein house* at your disposal. There's ample room for your office 
there in the conservatory." (At the end of May 1937 we moved from the 
Bechstein house into a studio building which Hitler had Bormann build 
from my design.) Thus I became the fourth "Obersalzberger," along 
with Hitler, Goering, and Bormann. 

Naturally I was happy to be granted so obvious a distinction and be 
admitted to the most intimate circle. But I soon came to realize that the 
change had not been exactly advantageous. From the solitary mountain 
valley we passed into an area guarded by a high barbed-wire fence 
which could be entered only after identity checks at two gates. It was 
reminiscent of an open-air enclosure for wild animals. Curiosity-seekers 
were always trying to catch a glimpse of some of the prominent inhabitants 
of the mountain. 

Bormann was the real master of Obersalzberg. He forcibly bought up 
centuries-old farms and had the buildings torn down. The same was 
done to the numerous votive chapels, despite the objections of the 
parishes. He also confiscated state forests, until the private area reached 
from the top of the mountain, which was some sixty-four hundred feet 
high, to the valley at an altitude of two thousand feet, and embraced 
an area of 2.7 square miles. The fence around the inner area was almost 
two miles long, around the outer area nine miles long. 

With total insensitivity to the natural surroundings, Bormann laid 
out a network of roads through this magnificient landscape. He turned 
forest paths, hitherto carpeted by pine needles and penetrated by roots, 
into paved promenades. A barracks, a vast garage building, a hotel for 
Hitler's guests, a new manor house, a complex for the constantly growing 
number of employees, sprang up as rapidly as in a suddenly fashionable 
resort. Dormitory barracks for hundreds of construction workers clung 

* A villa near Hitler's residence at Obersalzberg, formerly owned by his friends, 
the Bechsteins. 



85 ) Obersalzberg 

to the slopes; trucks loaded with building materials rumbled along the 
roads. At night the various building sites glowed with light, for work 
went on in two shifts, and occasionally detonations thundered through 
the valley. 

On the top of Hitlers private mountain Bormann erected a house 
that was luxuriously furnished in a somewhat rusticated ocean-liner 
style. You reached it by a precipitous road that ended in an elevator 
blasted into the rock. Bormann squandered between twenty and thirty 
million marks merely on the access route to this eyrie, which Hitler 
visited only a few times. Cynics in Hitler's entourage remarked: "Bor- 
mann has created a gold-rush town atmosphere. Only he doesn't find 
any, he spends it." Hitler regretted the hubbub but commented: "It's 
Bormann's doing; I don't want to interfere." Another time he said: 
"When it's all finished I'll look for a quiet valley and build another small 
wooden house there like the first." It never was finished. Bormann con- 
ceived a never-ending succession of new roads and buildings, and when 
the war finally broke out he began building underground quarters for 
Hitler and his entourage. 

The gigantic installations on the mountain were, in spite of Hitler's 
occasional sarcasms about the tremendous effort and expenditure, char- 
acteristic of the change in the Fuehrer's style of life and also indicative 
of his tendency to withdraw more and more from the wider world around 
him. Fear of assassination cannot explain it, for almost daily he allowed 
thousands of people to enter the protected area to pay homage to him. 
His entourage considered such behavior more dangerous than spontaneous 
strolls on public forest paths. 

In the summer of 1935 Hitler had decided to enlarge his modest 
country house into one more suitable for his public duties, to be known 
as the Berghof. He paid for the project out of his own money, but that 
was nothing but a gesture, since Bormann drew upon other sources for 
the subsidiary buildings, sums disproportionately greater than the amount 
Hitler himself provided. 

Hitler did not just sketch the plans for the Berghof. He borrowed 
drawing board, T-square, and other implements from me to draw the 
ground plan, renderings, and cross sections of his building to scale, 
refusing any help with the matter. There were only two other designs 
on which Hitler expended the personal care that he applied to his 
Obersalzberg house: that of the new Reich war flag and his own standard 
as Chief of State. 

Most architects will put a wide variety of ideas down on paper, and 
see which lends itself best to further development. It was characteristic 
of Hitler that he regarded his first inspiration as intuitively right and 
drew it with little hesitation. Afterward, he introduced only small re- 
touchings to eliminate glaring defects. 

The old house was preserved within the new one, whose living room 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 86 

joined the old through a large opening. The resultant ground plan was 
most impractical for the reception of official visitors. Their staffs had to 
be content with an unprepossessing entry hall which also led to the 
toilets, stairwell, and the large dining room. 

During official conferences Hitler's private guests were banished 
to the upper floor. But since the stairs led down to the entry hall, private 
visitors had to be cleared by a guard before being allowed to go through 
the room and leave the house for a walk. 

A huge picture window in the living room, famous for its size and 
the fact that it could be lowered, was Hitler s pride. It offered a view of 
the Untersberg, Berchtesgaden, and Salzburg. However, Hitler had been 
inspired to situate his garage underneath this window; when the wind was 
unfavorable, a strong smell of gasoline penetrated into the living room. 
All in all, this was a ground plan that would have been graded D by any 
professor at an institute of technology. On the other hand, these very 
clumsinesses gave the Berghof a strongly personal note. The place was 
still geared to the simple activities of a former weekend cottage, merely 
expanded to vast proportions. 

All the cost estimates were exceeded by far, and Hitler was somewhat 
embarrassed: 

I've completely used up the income from my book, although Amann's 
given me a further advance of several hundred thousand. Even so there's 
not enough money, so Bormann has told me today. The publishers are after 
me to release my second book, the 1928 one, for publication.* But I'm 
certainly glad this volume hasn't been published. What political complica- 
tions it would make for me at the moment. On the other hand it would 
relieve me of all financial pressures at one stroke. Amann promised me a 
million just as an advance, and beyond that it would bring in millions. 
Perhaps later, when I'm further along. Now it's impossible. 

There he sat, a voluntary prisoner with his view of the Untersberg 
where, legend has it, the Emperor Charlemagne still sleeps, but will 
one day arise to restore the past glory of the German Empire. Hitler 
naturally appropriated this legend for himself: "You see the Untersberg 
over there. It is no accident that I have my residence opposite it." 

Bormann was linked to Hitler not only by his vast building projects 
on the Obersalzberg. He contrived at the same time to take over admin- 
istration of Hitler's personal finances. Not only were Hitler's adjutants 
tied to the purse strings that Bormann controlled, but even Hitler's 
mistress was dependent upon him, as she candidly confessed to me. 
Hitler left it to Bormann to attend to her modest needs. 

* Hitler's so-called second book was not published until 1961. 



Sy ) Obersalzberg 

Hitler praised Bormanns financial skill. Once I heard him relate 
how Bormann had performed a significant service for the party during 
the difficult year of 1932 by introducing compulsory accident insurance 
for all party members. The income from this insurance fund considerably 
exceeded the expenditures, Hitler said, and the party was able to use 
the surplus for other purposes. Bormann also did his bit to eliminate 
Hitlers financial anxieties permanently after 1933. He found two sources 
of ample funds. Together with Hitlers personal photographer Hoffmann 
and Hoffmanns friend Ohnesorge, the Minister of Posts, he decided that 
Hitler had rights to the reproduction of his picture on postage stamps 
and was therefore entitled to payments. The percentage royalty was 
infinitesimal, but since the Fuehrer s head appeared on all stamps, mil- 
lions flowed into the privy purse administered by Bormann. 

Bormann developed another source by founding the Adolf Hitler 
Endowment Fund of German Industry. Entrepreneurs who were profiting 
by the economic boom were bluntly requested to show their appreciation 
by voluntary contributions to the Fuehrer. Since other party bigwigs had 
had the same notion, Bormann obtained a decree assuring him a monop- 
oly on such contributions. But he was clever enough to return a part of 
the donations to various party leaders "in behalf of the Fuehrer." Almost 
all of the top party f unctionaries received gifts from this fund. This power 
to set the living standards of the Gauleiters and Reichsleiters did not at- 
tract attention; but fundamentally it conferred on Bormann more power 
than many other positions within the hierarchy. 

With his typical perseverance, from 1934 on Bormann followed the 
simple principle of always remaining in closest proximity to the source 
of all grace and favor. He accompanied Hitler to the Berghof and on 
trips, and in the Chancellery never left his side until Hitler went to bed 
in the early morning hours. In this way Bormann became Hitler's hard- 
working, reliable, and ultimately indispensable secretary. He pretended 
to be obliging to everyone, and almost everyone availed himself of Bor- 
manns services— all the more so since he obviously served Hitler with 
utter selflessness. Even his immediate superior, Rudolf Hess, found it 
convenient to have Bormann close to Hitler at all times. 

The powerful men under Hitler were already jealously watching one 
another like so many pretenders to the throne. Quite early there were 
struggles for position among Goebbels, Goering, Rosenberg, Ley, Himmler, 
Ribbentrop, and Hess. Only Roehm had been left by the wayside, 
and before long Hess was to lose all his influence. But none of them 
recognized a threat in the shape of trusty Bormann. He had succeeded 
in representing himself as insignificant while imperceptibly building 
up his bastions. Even among so many ruthless men, he stood out by his 
brutality and coarseness. He had no culture, which might have put some 
restraints on him, and in every case he carried out whatever Hitler had 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 88 

ordered or what he himself had gathered from Hitler's hints. A sub- 
ordinate by nature, he treated his own subordinates as if he were dealing 
with cows and oxen. He was a peasant. 

I avoided Bormann; from the beginning we could not abide each 
other. We treated each other with formal correctness, as the private 
atmosphere at Obersalzberg required. With the exception of my own 
studio, I never designed a building for him to execute. 

Hitler s stays on "the mountain" provided him, as he often stressed, 
with the inner calm and assurance for his surprising decisions. He also 
composed his most important speeches there, and it is worth noting 
how he wrote them. Thus, before the Nuremberg Party Rally he regularly 
retreated to Obersalzberg for several weeks in order to work out his 
long speeches on basic principles. As the deadline drew nearer, his 
adjutants kept urging him to begin the dictation and kept everyone and 
everything away from him, even architectural plans and visitors, so that 
he would not be distracted from the work. But Hitler postponed the 
task from week to week, then from day to day, and would reluctantly set 
to work on it only under extreme time pressure. By then it was usually 
too late to finish all the speeches, and during the Rally, Hitler usually 
had to stay up nights to make up for the time he had squandered at 
Obersalzberg. 

I had the impression that he needed this pressure in order to be 
able to work, that in the bohemian manner of the artist he despised 
discipline and could not or would not force himself to work regularly. He 
let the content of his speeches or his thoughts ripen during these weeks 
of apparent idling until all that had accumulated poured out like a 
stream bursting its bounds upon followers or negotiators. 

Our move from our secluded valley to the bustle of Obersalzberg 
was ruinous to my work. The very sameness of the day's routine was 
tiring, the unchanging group around Hitler— the same coterie who 
regularly met in Munich and in Berlin-was boring. The only difference 
from Berlin and Munich was that wives were present on the mountain, 
and also two or three women secretaries and Eva Braun. 

Hitler usually appeared in the lower rooms late in the morning, 
around eleven o'clock. He then went through the press summaries, re- 
ceived several reports from Bormann, and made his first decisions. 
The day actually began with a prolonged afternoon dinner. The guests 
assembled in the anteroom. Hitler chose the lady he would take in to 
dinner, while Bormann, from about 1938 on, had the privilege of escort- 
ing Eva Braun, to the table; she usually sat on Hitler's left. That in 
itself was proof of Bormann's dominant position in the court. The dining 
room was a mixture of artistic rusticity and urban elegance of a sort 
which was often characteristic of country houses of the wealthy. The 



89 ) Obersalzberg 

walls and ceilings were paneled in pale larchwood, the chairs covered 
with bright red morocco leather. The china was a simple white; the 
silver bore Hitler's monogram and was the same as that used in Berlin. 
Hitler always took pleasure in its restrained floral decoration. The food 
was simple and substantial: soup, a meat course, dessert, with either 
Fachinger mineral water or wine. The waiters, in white vests and black 
trousers, were members of the SS bodyguard. Some twenty persons sat 
at the long table, but because of its length no general conversation could 
arise. Hitler sat in the middle, facing the window. He talked with the 
person opposite him, who was different every day, or with the ladies to 
either side of him. 

Shortly after dinner the walk to the teahouse began. The width of 
the path left room for only two abreast, so that the file resembled a 
procession. Two security men walked at the head. Then came Hitler 
with one other person, with whom he conversed, followed in any order 
by the dinner company, with more guards bringing up the rear. Hitler s 
two police dogs roamed about the area and ignored his commands— 
the only oppositionists at his court. To Bormann's vexation, Hitler was 
addicted to this particular walk, which took about half an hour, and dis- 
dained using the mile-long paved forest roads. 

The teahouse had been built at one of Hitler's favorite lookout points 
above the Berchtesgaden valley. The company always marveled at the 
panorama in the same phrases. Hitler always agreed in much the same 
language. The teahouse itself consisted of a round room about twenty- 
five feet in diameter, pleasing in its proportions, with a row of small- 
paned windows and a fireplace along the interior wall. The company sat 
in easy chairs around the round table, with Eva Braun and one of the 
other ladies again at Hitler's side. Those who did not find seats went into 
a small adjoining room. According to taste, one had tea, coffee, or 
chocolate, and various types of cake and cookies, followed by liqueurs. 
Here, at the coffee table, Hitler was particularly fond of drifting into end- 
less monologues. The subjects were mostly familiar to the company, who 
therefore listened absently, though pretending attention. Occasionally 
Hitler himself fell asleep over one of his monologues. The company then 
continued chatting in whispers, hoping that he would awaken in time for 
the evening meal. It was all very familial. 

After about two hours the teatime ended, generally around six. 
Hitler stood up, and the procession moved on to the parking area, about 
twenty minutes' walk, where a column of cars waited. After returning 
to the Berghof, Hitler usually withdrew to the upper rooms, while the 
retinue scattered. Bormann frequently disappeared into the room of one 
of the younger stenographers, which elicited spiteful remarks from 
Eva Braun. 

Two hours later the company met again for supper, with repetition 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( <)0 

of the afternoon ritual. Afterward, Hitler went into the salon, again fol- 
lowed by the still unchanged company. 

The Troost studio had furnished the salon sparsely, but with over- 
size furniture: a sideboard over ten feet high and eighteen feet long 
which housed phonograph records along with various certificates of 
honorary citizenship awarded to Hitler; a monumental classicist china 
closet; a massive clock crowned by a fierce bronze eagle. In front of the 
large picture window stood a table twenty feet long, which Hitler used 
for signing documents or, later, for studying military maps. There were 
two sitting areas: one a sunken nook at the back of the room, with the 
red upholstered chairs grouped around a fireplace; the other, near the 
window, dominated by a round table whose fine veneer was protected by 
a glass top. Beyond this sitting area was the movie projection cabinet, its 
openings concealed by a tapestry. Along the opposite wall stood a mas- 
sive chest containing built-in speakers, and adorned by a large bronze 
bust of Richard Wagner by Arno Breker. Above this hung another tapes- 
try which concealed the movie screen. Large oil paintings covered the 
walls: a lady with exposed bosom ascribed to Bordone, a pupil of Titian; a 
picturesque reclining nude said to be by Titian himself; Feuerbach's 
Nana in a very handsome frame; an early landscape by Spitzweg; a land- 
scape with Roman ruins by Pannini; and, surprisingly, a kind of altar 
painting by Eduard von Steinle, one of the Nazarene group, representing 
King Henry, founder of cities. But there was no Griitzner. Hitler occa- 
sionally let it be known that he had paid for these paintings out of his 
own income. 

We found places on the sofas or in one of the easy chairs in either of 
the sitting areas; the two tapestries were raised; and the second part of 
the evening began with a movie, as was also the custom when Hitler was 
in Berlin. Afterward the company gathered around the huge fireplace- 
some six or eight persons lined up in a row on the excessively long and 
uncomfortably low sofa, while Hitler, once more flanked by Eva Braun 
and one of the ladies, ensconced himself in one of the soft chairs. Because 
of the inept arrangement of the furniture the company was so scattered 
that no common conversation could arise. Everyone talked in low voices 
with his neighbor. Hitler murmured trivialities with the two women at his 
side, or whispered with Eva Braun; sometimes he held her hand. But 
often he fell silent or stared broodingly into the fire. Then the guests fell 
silent also, in order not to disturb him in important thoughts. 

Occasionally the movies were discussed, Hitler commenting mainly 
on the female actors and Eva Braun on the males. No one took the trouble 
to raise the conversation above the level of trivialities by, for example, 
remarking on any of the new trends in directing. Of course the choice of 
films scarcely allowed for any other approach, for they were all standard 
products of the entertainment industry. Such experiments of the period 



gi ) Obersalzberg 

as Curt Oriel's Michelangelo film were never shown, at least not when I 
was there. Sometimes Bormann used the occasion to take some swipes at 
Goebbels, who was responsible for German film production. Thus, he 
would remark that Goebbels had made all kinds of trouble for the movie 
based on Kleist's The Broken Jug because he thought Emil Jannings's 
portrayal of the lame village magistrate, Adam, was a caricature of him- 
self. Hitler gleefully watched the film, which had been withdrawn from 
circulation, and gave orders that it be shown again in the largest Berlin 
movie theater. But— and this is typical of Hitler's sometimes amazing 
lack of authority— for a long time this simply was not done. Bormann, how- 
ever, kept bringing up the matter until Hitler showed serious irritation 
and let Goebbels know that his orders had better be obeyed. 

Later, during the war, Hitler gave up the evening showings, saying 
that he wanted to renounce his favorite entertainment "out of sympathy 
for the privations of the soldiers." Instead records were played. But 
although the record collection was excellent, Hitler always preferred the 
same music. Neither baroque nor classical music, neither chamber music 
nor symphonies, interested him. Before long the order of the records be- 
came virtually fixed. First he wanted a few bravura selections from 
Wagnerian operas, to be followed promptly with operettas. That remained 
the pattern. Hitler made a point of trying to guess the names of the 
sopranos and was pleased when he guessed right, as he frequently did. 

To animate these rather barren evenings, sparkling wine was handed 
around and, after the occupation of France, confiscated champagne of 
a cheap brand; Goering and his air marshals had appropriated the best 
brands. From one o'clock on some members of the company, in spite of 
all their efforts to control themselves, could no longer repress their yawns. 
But the social occasion dragged on in monotonous, wearing emptiness for 
another hour or more, until at last Eva Braun had a few words with 
Hitler and was permitted to go upstairs. Hitler would stand up about 
a quarter of an hour later, to bid his company goodnight. Those who 
remained, liberated, often followed those numbing hours with a gay 
party over champagne and cognac. 

In the early hours of the morning we went home dead tired, ex- 
hausted from doing nothing. After a few days of this I was seized by what 
I called at the time "the mountain disease." That is, I felt exhausted and 
vacant from the constant waste of time. Only when Hitler's idleness was 
interrupted by conferences was I free to put myself and my associates to 
work on designs. As a favored permanent guest and inhabitant of Ober- 
salzberg I could not withdraw from these evenings, agonizing as they 
were, without appearing impolite. Dr. Otto Dietrich, the press chief, ven- 
tured to slip away to performances at the Salzburg Festival a few times, 
but in doing so he incurred Hitler's anger. During Hitler's longer stays at 
Obersalzberg the only way to save oneself was to flee to Berlin. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 92 

Sometimes familiars of Hitler s old Munich or Berlin circles, such as 
Goebbels, Franz Schwarz, the party treasurer, or Hermann Esser, State 
Secretary for Tourism in the Ministry of Propaganda, put in an appearance. 
But this happened rarely and then only for a day or two. Even Hess, 
who should have had every reason to check the activities of his deputy, 
Bormann, turned up only two or three times, at least while I was there. 
These close associates, who could frequently be met at afternoon dinners 
in the Chancellery, obviously avoided Obersalzberg. Their absence was 
particularly noticeable because Hitler showed considerable pleasure when 
they turned up and frequently asked them to come often and to stay 
longer. But they had meanwhile become the centers of their own circles, 
and it was therefore rather uncomfortable for them to submit to Hitler s 
altogether different routine and to his manner, which in spite of all his 
charm was painfully self-assertive. 

Eva Braun was allowed to be present during visits from old party 
associates. She was banished as soon as other dignitaries of the Reich, such 
as cabinet ministers, appeared at table. Even when Goering and his wife 
came, Eva Braun had to stay in her room. Hitler obviously regarded her as 
socially acceptable only within strict limits. Sometimes I kept her com- 
pany in her exile, a room next to Hitler s bedroom. She was so intimidated 
that she did not dare leave the house for a walk. "I might meet the 
Goerings in the hall." 

In general Hitler showed little consideration for her feelings. He 
would enlarge on his attitude toward women as though she were not 
present: "A highly intelligent man should take a primitive and stupid 
woman. Imagine if on top of everything else I had a woman who inter- 
fered with my work! In my leisure time I want to have peace. ... I 
could never marry. Think of the problems if I had children! In the end 
they would try to make my son my successor. Besides, the chances are 
slim for someone like me to have a capable son. That is almost always 
how it goes in such cases. Consider Goethe's son— a completely worthless 
person! . . . Lots of women are attracted to me because I am unmarried. 
That was especially useful during our days of struggle. It's the same as 
with a movie actor; when he marries he loses a certain something for the 
women who adore him. Then he is no longer their idol as he was bef ore." 

Hitler believed that he had a powerful sexual appeal to women. But 
he was also extremely wary about this; he never knew, he used to say, 
whether a woman preferred him as the Chancellor or as Adolf Hitler, and 
as he often remarked ungallantly, he certainly did not want witty and in- 
telligent women about him. In making such remarks he was apparently 
not aware of how offensive they must have been to the ladies present. On 
the other hand Hitler could sometimes behave like a good head of a 
family. Once, when Eva Braun was skiing and came to tea rather late, he 



93 ) Obersalzberg 

looked uneasy, kept glancing nervously at the clock, and was plainly wor- 
ried that she might have had an accident. 

Eva Braun came of a family of modest circumstances. Her father 
was a schoolteacher. I never met her parents; they never appeared and 
continued to live as befitted their station until the end. Eva Braun, too, 
remained simple; she dressed quietly and wore the inexpensive jewelry* 
that Hitler gave her for Christmas or her birthdays: usually semiprecious 
stones worth a few hundred marks at most and actually insulting in their 
modesty. Bormann would present a selection, and Hitler would choose 
these trinkets with what seemed to me petit-bourgeois taste. 

Eva Braun had no interest in politics. She scarcely ever attempted to 
influence Hitler. With a good eye for the facts of everyday life, however, 
she did sometimes make remarks about minor abuses in conditions in 
Munich. Bormann did not like that, since in such cases he was instantly 
called to account. She was sports-loving, a good skier with plenty of en- 
durance with whom my wife and I frequently undertook mountain tours 
outside the enclosed area. Once Hitler actually gave her a week's vacation 
—when he himself was not at Obersalzberg, of course. She went to Zurs 
with us for a few days. There, unrecognized, she danced with great pas- 
sion into the wee hours of the morning with young army officers. She was 
very far from being a modern Madame Pompadour; for the historian she 
is interesting only insofar as she set off some of Hitler's traits. 

Out of sympathy for her predicament I soon began to feel a liking for 
this unhappy woman, who was so deeply attached to Hitler. In addition, 
we were linked by our common dislike for Bormann, although at that 
time what we resented most was the coarseness with which he was raping 
the beauty of nature at Obersalzberg and betraying his wife. When I 
heard at the Nuremberg Trial that Hitler had married Eva Braun in the 
last day and a half of his life, I felt glad for her— even though I could 
sense even in this act the cynicism with which Hitler had treated her and 
probably women in general. 

I have often wondered whether Hitler felt anything like affection 
for children. He certainly made an effort when he met them, whether 
they were the children of acquaintances or unknown to him. He even 
tried to deal with them in a paternally friendly fashion, but never man- 
aged to be very convincing about it. He never found the proper easy man- 
ner of treating them; after a few benign words he would soon turn to 
others. On the whole he regarded children as representatives of the next 

* N. E. Gun's Eva Braun: Hitlers Mistress (Meredith, 1968) gives a list of 
valuable jewelry. So far as I remember she did not wear anything of the sort, nor 
does any appear in the many photographs of her. Perhaps the list refers to the ob- 
jects of value which Hitler saw to it that she received through Bormann during 
the war. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 94 

generation and therefore took more pleasure in their appearance (blond, 
blue-eyed), their stature (strong, healthy), or their intelligence (brisk, 
aggressive) than in their nature as children. His personality had no effect 
whatsoever upon my own children. 

What remains in my memory of social life at Obersalzberg is a curi- 
ous vacuity. Fortunately, during my first years of imprisonment, while my 
recollections were still fresh, I noted down a few scraps of conversations 
which I can now regard as reasonably authentic. 

In those hundreds of teatimes questions of fashion, of raising dogs, 
of the theater and movies, of operettas and their stars were discussed, 
along with endless trivialities about the family lives of others. Hitler 
scarcely ever said anything about the Jews, about his domestic opponents, 
let alone about the necessity for setting up concentration camps. Perhaps 
such topics were omitted less out of deliberate intention than because 
they would have been out of place amidst the prevailing banality. On the 
other hand, Hitler made fun of his closest associates with striking fre- 
quency. It is no accident that these particular remarks have remained in 
my mind, for after all they involved persons who were officially immune 
from all criticism. Hitler's private circle was not held to these rules, and 
in any case Hitler considered it pointless to attempt to keep women from 
gossiping. Was it self-aggrandizement when he spoke disparagingly of 
everything and everyone? Or did such talk spring from his general con- 
tempt for all persons and events? 

Thus Hitler had little sympathy with Himmler in his mythologizing 
of the SS. 

What nonsense! Here we have at last reached an age that has left all 
mysticism behind it, and now he wants to start that all over again. We might 
just as well have stayed with the church. At least it had tradition. To think 
that I may some day be turned into an SS saint! Can you imagine it? I 
would turn over in my grave. . . . 

Himmler has made another speech calling Charlemagne the "butcher 
of the Saxons." Killing all those Saxons was not a historical crime, as 
Himmler thinks. Charlemagne did a good thing in subjugating Widukind 
and killing the Saxons out of hand. He thereby made possible the empire 
of the Franks and the entry of Western culture into what is now Germany. 

Himmler had scientists undertake excavations of prehistoric sites. 
Hitler commented: 

Why do we call the whole world's attention to the fact that we have 
no past? It isn't enough that the Romans were erecting great buildings when 
our forefathers were still living in mud huts; now Himmler is starting to 



95 ) Obersalzberg 

dig up these villages of mud huts and enthusing over every potsherd and 
stone axe he finds. All we prove by that is that we were still throwing stone 
hatchets and crouching around open fires when Greece and Rome had 
already reached the highest stage of culture. We really should do our best 
to keep quiet about this past. Instead Himmler makes a great fuss about it 
all. The present-day Romans must be having a laugh at these revelations. 

Amid his political associates in Berlin, Hitler made harsh pronounce- 
ments against the church, but in the presence of the women he adopted a 
milder tone— one of the instances where he adapted his remarks to his 
surroundings. 

"The church is certainly necessary for the people. It is a strong and 
conservative element," he might say at one time or another in this private 
circle. However, he conceived of the church as an instrument that could 
be useful to him. "If only Reibi [this was his nickname for Reich Bishop 
Ludwig Miiller] had some kind of stature. But why do they appoint a 
nobody of an army chaplain? I'd be glad to give him my full support. 
Think of all he could do with that. Through me the Evangelical [Protes- 
tant] Church could become the established church, as in England." 

Even after 1942 Hitler went on maintaining that he regarded the 
church as indispensable in political life. He would be happy, he said in 
one of those teatime talks at Obersalzberg, if someday a prominent 
churchman turned up who was suited to lead one of the churches— or if 
possible both the Catholic and Protestant churches reunited. He still 
regretted that Reich Bishop Miiller was not the right man to carry out his 
far-reaching plans. But he sharply condemned the campaign against the 
church, calling it a crime against the future of the nation. For it was im- 
possible, he said, to replace the church by any "party ideology." Un- 
doubtedly, he continued, the church would learn to adapt to the political 
goals of National Socialism in the long run, as it had always adapted in 
the course of history. A new party religion would only bring about a 
relapse into the mysticism of the Middle Ages. The growing SS myth 
showed that clearly enough, as did Rosenberg's unreadable Myth of the 
Twentieth Century. 

If in the course of such a monologue Hitler had pronounced a more 
negative judgment upon the church, Bormann would undoubtedly have 
taken from his jacket pocket one of the white cards he always carried 
with him. For he noted down all Hitlers remarks that seemed to him 
important; and there was hardly anything he wrote down more eagerly 
than deprecating comments on the church. At the time I assumed that he 
was gathering material for a biography of Hitler. 

Around 1937, when Hitler heard that at the instigation of the party 
and the SS vast numbers of his followers had left the church because it 
was obstinately opposing his plans, he nevertheless ordered his chief as- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 96 

sociates, above all Goering and Goebbels, to remain members of the 
church. He too would remain a member of the Catholic Church, he said, 
although he had no real attachment to it. And in fact he remained in the 
church until his suicide. 

Hitler had been much impressed by a scrap of history he had learned 
from a delegation of distinguished Arabs. When the Mohammedans at- 
tempted to penetrate beyond France into Central Europe during the 
eighth century, his visitors had told him, they had been driven back at 
the Battle of Tours. Had the Arabs won this battle, the world would be 
Mohammedan today. For theirs was a religion that believed in spreading 
the faith by the sword and subjugating all nations to that faith. The 
Germanic peoples would have become heirs to that religion. Such a creed 
was perfectly suited to the Germanic temperament. Hitler said that the 
conquering Arabs, because of their racial inferiority, would in the long 
run have been unable to contend with the harsher climate and conditions 
of the country. They could not have kept down the more vigorous natives, 
so that ultimately not Arabs but Islamized Germans could have stood at 
the head of this Mohammedan Empire. 

Hitler usually concluded this historical speculation by remarking: 
"You see, it's been our misfortune to have the wrong religion. Why didn't 
we have the religion of the Japanese, who regard sacrifice for the Father- 
land as the highest good? The Mohammedan religion too would have 
been much more compatible to us than Christianity. Why did it have to 
be Christianity with its meekness and flabbiness?" It is remarkable that 
even before the war he sometimes went on: "Today the Siberians, the 
White Russians, and the people of the steppes live extremely healthy 
lives. For that reason they are better equipped for development and in 
the long run biologically superior to the Germans." This was an idea he 
was destined to repeat in far more drastic tones during the last months 
of the war. 

Rosenberg sold his seven-hundred page Myth of the Twentieth Cen- 
tury in editions of hundreds of thousands. The public regarded the book 
as the standard text for party ideology, but Hitler in those teatime 
conversations bluntly called it "stuff nobody can understand," written by 
"a narrow-minded Baltic German who thinks in horribly complicated 
terms." He expressed wonderment that such a book could ever have at- 
tained such sales: "A relapse into medieval notions!" I wondered if such 
private remarks were carried back to Rosenberg. 

Hitler believed that the culture of the Greeks had reached the peak 
of perfection in every field. Their view of life, he said, as expressed in their 
architecture, had been "fresh and healthy." One day a photograph of a 
beautiful woman swimmer stirred him to enthusiastic reflections: "What 
splendid bodies you can see today. It is only in our century that young 
people have once again approached Hellenistic ideals through sports. 



97 ) Obersalzberg 

How the body was neglected in earlier centuries. In this respect our times 
differ from all previous cultural epochs since antiquity." He personally, 
however, was averse to any kind of sports. Moreover, he never mentioned 
having practiced any sport at all as a young man. 

By the Greeks he meant the Dorians. Naturally his view was affected 
by the theory, fostered by the scientists of his period, that the Dorian 
tribe which migrated into Greece from the north had been of Germanic 
origin and that, therefore, its culture had not belonged to the Mediter- 
ranean world. 

Goering's passion for hunting was one of his favorite topics. 

How can a person be excited about such a thing. Killing animals, if 
it must be done, is the butcher's business. But to spend a great deal of 
money on it in addition. ... I understand, of course, that there must be 
professional hunters to shoot sick animals. If only there were still some 
danger connected with hunting, as in the days when men used spears for 
killing game. But today, when anybody with a fat belly can safely shoot 
the animal down from a distance. . . . Hunting and horse racing are the 
last remnants of a dead feudal world. 

Hitler also took delight in having Ambassador Hewel, Ribbentrop's 
liaison man, transmit the content of telephone conversations with the 
Foreign Minister. He would even coach Hewel in ways to disconcert or 
confuse his superior. Sometimes he stood right beside Hewel, who would 
hold his hand over the mouthpiece of the telephone and repeat what 
Ribbentrop was saying, while Hitler whispered what to answer. Usually 
these were sarcastic remarks intended to fan the nervous Foreign Minis- 
ter's suspicions that unauthorized persons might be influencing Hitler on 
questions of foreign policy, thus infringing on his domain. 

After dramatic negotiations Hitler was apt to deride his opposites. 
Once he described Schuschnigg's visit to Obersalzberg on February 12, 
1938. By a pretended fit of passion he had made the Austrian Chancellor 
realize the gravity of the situation, he said, and finally forced him to 
yield. Many of those hysterical scenes that have been reported were prob- 
ably carefully staged. In general, self-control was one of Hitler's most 
striking characteristics. In those early days he lost control of himself only 
a very few times, at least in my presence. 

Some time around 1936 Schacht had come to the salon of the Berghof 
to report. We guests were seated on the adjacent terrace and the large 
window of the salon was wide open. Hitler was shouting at his Finance 
Minister, evidently in extreme excitement. We heard Schacht replying 
firmly in a loud voice. The dialogue grew increasingly heated on both 
sides and then ceased abruptly. Furious, Hitler came out on the terrace 
and ranted on about this disobliging, limited minister who was holding 



INSrDE THE THIRD REICH ( 98 

up the rearmament program. He had another such fit of rage at Pastor 
Niemoller in 1937. Niemoller had once again delivered a rebellious sermon 
in Dahlem; at the same time transcripts of his tapped telephone conversa- 
tions were presented to Hitler. In a bellow Hitler ordered Niemoller to be 
put in a concentration camp and, since he had proved himself incorrigi- 
ble, kept there for life. 

Another incident refers back to his early youth. On a trip from Bud- 
weis to Krems in 1942 I noticed a large plaque on a house in the village 
of Spital, close to the Czech border. In this house, according to the 
plaque, "the Fuehrer lived in his youth." It was a handsome house in a 
prosperous village. I mentioned this to Hitler. He instantly flew into a 
rage and shouted for Bormann, who hurried in much alarmed. Hitler 
snarled at him: How many times had he said that this village must never 
be mentioned. But that idiot of a Gauleiter had gone and put up a plaque 
there. It must be removed at once. At the time I could not explain his 
excitement, since he was usually pleased when Bormann told him about 
the refurbishing of other sites connected with his youth around Linz and 
Braunau. Apparently he had some motive for erasing this part of his 
youth. Today, of course, these chapters of family history lost in the mists 
of this Austrian forest region are well known.* 

Sometimes Hitler sketched one of the towers of the historic fortifica- 
tions of Linz. "Here was my favorite playground. I was a poor pupil in 
school, but I was the leader of our pranks. Someday I am going to have 
this tower made into a large youth hostel, in memory of those days." He 
would also frequently speak of the first important political impressions of 
his youth. Almost all of his fellow pupils in Linz, he said, had distinctly 
felt that the immigration of the Czechs into German Austria should be 
stopped. This had made him conscious of the problem of nationalities 
for the first time. But then, in Vienna, he said, the danger of Judaism had 
abruptly dawned on him. Many of the workers with whom he was thrown 
together had been intensely anti-Semitic. In one respect, however, he had 
not agreed with the construction workers: "I rejected their Social Demo- 
cratic views. Moreover, I never joined a union. This attitude brought me 
into my first political difficulties." Perhaps this was one of the reasons he 
did not have good memories of Vienna— altogether in contrast to his time 
in Munich before the war. For he would go on and on in praise of Munich 
and— with surprising frequency— in praise of the good sausages to be had 
in its butcher shops. 

He spoke with unqualified respect about the Bishop of Linz in his 
early days, who in the face of many obstacles insisted on the unusual pro- 
portions of the cathedral he was building in Linz. The bishop had had 

* The reference is to the illegitimacy of Hitler's father, Alois Schicklgruber.— 
Translators' note. 



99 ) Obersalzberg 

difficulties with the Austrian government, Hitler said, because he wanted 
to surpass St. Stephan's Cathedral and the government did not wish to 
see Vienna outstripped. 1 Such remarks were usually followed by com- 
ments on the way the Austrian central government had crushed all inde- 
pendent cultural impulses on the part of cities like Graz, Linz, or Inns- 
bruck. Hitler could say these things apparently without being aware that 
he was imposing the same kind of forcible regimentation upon whole 
countries. Now that he was giving the orders, he said, he would help 
his native city win its proper place. His program for the transforma- 
tion of Linz into a "metropolis" envisioned a number of impressive public 
buildings on both sides of the Danube. A suspension bridge was to con- 
nect the two banks. The apex of his plan was a large Gau House (District 
Headquarters) for the National Socialist Party, with a huge meeting hall 
and a bell tower. There would be a crypt in this tower for his own burial 
place. Other impressive monuments along the shore were to be a town 
hall, a large theater, a military headquarters, a stadium, a picture gallery, 
a library, a museum of armaments, and an exhibition building, as well as 
a monument celebrating the liberation of Austria in 1938 and another 
glorifying Anton Bruckner.* The design for the picture gallery and the 
stadium was to be assigned to me. The stadium would be situated on a 
hill overlooking the city. Hitler's residence for his old age would be 
located nearby, also on a height. 

Hitler sometimes went into raptures over the shorelines in Budapest 
which had grown up on both sides of the Danube in the course of cen- 
turies. It was his ambition to transform Linz into a German Budapest. 
Vienna was oriented all wrong, he would comment in this connection, 
since it merely turned its back to the Danube. The planners had neglected 
to incorporate the river in their design. Thanks to what he would be doing 
with the river in Linz, the city might some day rival Vienna. No doubt he 
was not altogether serious in making such remarks; he would be tempted 
into them by his dislike for Vienna, which would spontaneously break 
out from time to time. But there were many other times when he would 
exclaim over the brilliant stroke of city planning accomplished in Vienna 
by the use of the former fortifications. 

Before the war Hitler was already talking about the time when, his 
political goals accomplished, he would withdraw from the affairs of state 
and finish out his life in Linz. When this time came, he would say, he 
would no longer play any political part at all; for only if he withdrew 
completely could his successor gain authority. He would not interfere in 
any way. People would turn to his successor quickly enough once it be- 
came evident that power was now in those hands. Then he himself would 
be soon forgotten. Everyone would forsake him. Playing with this idea, 

* Hitler himself had done sketches for all these structures. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( lOO 

with a good measure of self-pity, he continued: "Perhaps one of my former 
associates will visit me occasionally. But I don't count on it. Aside from 
Fraulein Braun, I'll take no one with me. Fraulein Braun and my dog. 
I'll be lonely. For why should anyone voluntarily stay with me for any 
length of time? Nobody will take notice of me any more. They'll all go 
running after my successor. Perhaps once a year they'll show up for my 
birthday." Naturally everyone at the table protested and assured him 
that they would remain faithful and always stay by him. Whatever Hitler's 
motives may have been for these allusions to an early retirement from 
politics, he at any rate seemed to assume at such times that the source of 
his authority was not the magnetism of his personality but his position of 
power. 

The nimbus that surrounded Hitler for those of his collaborators who 
did not have any intimate association with him was incomparably greater 
than for his immediate entourage. Members of the "retinue" did not speak 
respectfully of the "Fuehrer," but of the "Chief." They were sparing in 
their use of "Heil Hitler" and greeted one another with an ordinary 
"Guten Tag." They even openly made fun of Hitler, without his taking 
offense. Thus, his standard phrase, "There are two possibilities," would be 
used by one of his secretaries, Fraulein Schroder, in his presence, often in 
the most banal of contexts. She would say: "There are two possibilities. 
Either it is going to rain or it is not going to rain." Eva Braun in the pres- 
ence of his table companions might pertly call Hitler's attention to the 
fact that his tie did not go with his suit, and occasionally she gaily re- 
ferred to herself as "Mother of the Country." 

Once, when we were seated at the round table in the teahouse, Hitler 
began staring at me. Instead of dropping my eyes, I took it as a challenge. 
Who knows what primitive instincts are involved in such staring duels. I 
had had others, and always used to win them, but this time I had to mus- 
ter almost inhuman strength, seemingly forever, not to yield to the ever- 
mounting urge to look away— until Hitler suddenly closed his eyes and 
shortly afterward turned to the woman at his side. 

Sometimes I asked myself: Why can't I call Hitler my friend? What 
is missing? I spent endless time with him, was almost at home in his pri- 
vate circle and, moreover, his foremost associate in his favorite field, archi- 
tecture. 

Everything was missing. Never in my life have I met a person who 
so seldom revealed his feelings, and if he did so, instantly locked them 
away again. During my time in Spandau I talked with Hess about this 
peculiarity of Hitler's. Both of us agreed that there had been moments 
when we felt we had come close to him. But we were invariably dis- 
illusioned. If either of us ventured a slightly more personal tone, Hitler 
promptly put up an unbreakable wall. 

Hess did think there had been one person with whom Hitler had 



ioi ) Obersalzberg 

had a closer bond: Dietrich Eckart. But as we talked about it, we decided 
that the relationship had been, on Hitler s side, more a matter of admira- 
tion for the older man, who was regarded chiefly in anti-Semitic circles 
as a leading writer, than a friendship. When Eckart died in 1923 there 
remained four men with whom Hitler used the Du of close friendship: 
Hermann Esser, Christian Weber, Julius Streicher, and Ernst Roehm.* 
In Esser's case he found a pretext after 1933 to reintroduce the formal 
Sie; Weber he avoided; Streicher he treated impersonally; and Roehm he 
had killed. Even toward Eva Braun he was never completely relaxed and 
human. The gulf between the leader of the nation and the simple girl 
was always maintained. Now and then, and it always struck a faintly 
jarring note, he would call her Tschapperl, a Bavarian peasant pet name 
with a slightly contemptuous flavor. 

Hitler must already have realized the immense drama that his life 
was, the high stakes he was playing for, by the time he had a long con- 
versation with Cardinal Faulhaber at Obersalzberg in November 1936. 
Afterward Hitler sat alone with me in the bay window of the dining 
room, while the twilight fell. For a long time he looked out of the window 
in silence. Then he said pensively: "There are two possibilities for me: To 
win through with all my plans, or to fail. If I win, I shall be one of the 
greatest men in history. If I fail, I shall be condemned, despised, and 
damned." 



* Hermann Esser was one of the very first party members and later became 
the state secretary for tourism. Christian Weber, also one of the earliest party mem- 
bers, was reduced to a rather limited role after 1933; among other things he was in 
charge of the horse races at Riem. Ernst Roehm was head of the SA and was mur- 
dered by Hitler in 1934. Julius Streicher was Germany's foremost anti-Semite, editor 
of Der Stiirmer and Gauleiter of Franconia. 



8 



The New Chancellery 



TO PROVIDE THE PROPER BACKGROUND FOR HIS RISE TO THE RANK OF "ONE 

of the greatest men in history," Hitler now demanded an architectural 
stage set of imperial majesty. He described the Chancellery into which he 
had moved on January 30, 1933, as "fit for a soap company." It would 
not do for the headquarters of a now powerful Reich, he said. 

At the end of January 1938 Hitler called me to his office. "I have an 
urgent assignment for you," he said solemnly, standing in the middle of 
the room. "I shall be holding extremely important conferences in the 
near future. For these, I need grand halls and salons which will make an 
impression on people, especially on the smaller dignitaries. For the site I 
am placing the whole of Voss Strasse at your disposal. The cost is im- 
material. But it must be done very quickly and be of solid construction. 
How long do you need? For plans, blueprints, everything? Even a year 
and a half or two years would be too long for me. Can you be done by 
January 10, 1939? I want to hold the next diplomatic reception in the 
new Chancellery." I was dismissed. 

Hitler later described the rest of that day in his speech for the raising 
of the ridgepole of the building: "My Generalbauinspektor (Inspector 
General of Buildings) asked for a few hours time for reflection, and in 
the evening he came to me with a list of deadlines and told me: 'On such- 
and-such a date in March the old buildings will be gone, on August 1 we 
will celebrate the raising of the ridgepole, and on January 9, my Leader, 

( 102 ) 



103 ) The New Chancellery 

I shall report completion to you/ I myself have been in the business, in 
building, and know what such a schedule means. This has never hap- 
pened before. It is a unique achievement." 1 Actually, it was the most 
thoughtless promise of my life. But Hitler seemed satisfied. 

I had the razing of the houses on Voss Strasse begun at once in 
order to clear the site. Simultaneously, I plunged ahead with plans for 
the exterior of the building. The underground air-raid shelter had in 
fact to be started from crude sketches. But even at a later stage of the 
work I had to order many components before the architectural data 
had been definitely settled. For example, the longest delivery times 
were required for the enormous hand-knotted rugs which were to be used 
in several large salons. I decided their colors and size before I knew what 
the rooms they were meant for would look like. In fact the rooms were 
more or less designed around these rugs. I decided to forgo any compli- 
cated organizational plan and schedule, since these would only have re- 
vealed that the project could not possibly be carried out within the time 
limit. In many respects this improvised approach resembled the methods 
I was to apply four years later in directing the German war economy. 

The oblong site was an invitation to string a succession of rooms 
on a long axis. I showed Hitler my design: From Wilhelmsplatz an arriv- 
ing diplomat drove through great gates into a court of honor. By way of 
an outside staircase he first entered a medium-sized reception room from 
which double doors almost seventeen feet high opened into a large 
hall clad in mosaic. He then ascended several steps, passed through a 
round room with domed ceiling, and saw before him a gallery four 
hundred eighty feet long. Hitler was particularly impressed by my gallery 
because it was twice as long as the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles. Deep 
window niches were to filter the light, creating that pleasant effect I had 
seen in the Salle de Bal at the Palace of Fontainebleau. 

As a whole, then, it was to be a series of rooms done in a rich 
variety of materials and color combinations, in all some seven hundred 
twenty-five feet long. Only then came Hitlers reception hall. To be 
sure, it was architecture that reveled in ostentation and aimed at startling 
effects. But that sort of thing existed in the baroque period, too— it has 
always existed. 

Hitler was delighted: "On the long walk from the entrance to the 
reception hall they'll get a taste of the power and grandeur of the 
German Reich!" During the next several months he asked to see the plans 
again and again but interfered remarkably little in this building, even 
though it was destined for him personally. He let me work freely. 

The haste with which Hitler was urging the building of the new 
Chancellery had a deeper cause in his anxiety about his health. He 
seriously feared that he did not have much longer to live. Since 1935 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( IO4 

his imagination had dwelt increasingly on a stomach ailment which he 
tried to cure by a self-imposed regimen. He thought he knew what foods 
harmed him and in the course of time was prescribing a starvation diet 
for himself. A little soup, salad, small quantities of the lightest food- 
he no longer ate anything substantial. He sounded desperate when he 
pointed to his plate: "A man is supposed to keep alive on that! Look 
at it. It's easy for the doctors to say that people ought to eat what they 
have an appetite for. 2 Hardly anything is good for me nowadays. After 
every meal the pain begins. Leave out still more? Then how am I going 
to exist?" 

He often interrupted a conference because of his gastric pains and 
withdrew for half an hour or more, or did not return at all. He also 
suffered, so he said, from excessive formation of gas, cardiac pains, and 
insomnia. Eva Braun once confided that he had said to her— this before 
he was fifty: 'Til soon have to give you your freedom. Why should you be 
tied to an old man?" 

His physician, Dr. Brandt, was a young surgeon who tried to per- 
suade Hitler to undergo a thorough examination by a first-class specialist 
in internal medicine. All of us supported this proposal. The names of 
celebrated doctors were mentioned, and plans made for carrying out an 
examination without creating any stir, for instance at a military hospital, 
since secrecy could be most easily maintained there. But in the end, 
again and again, Hitler repulsed all such suggestions. He simply could not 
afford to be regarded as sick, he said. It would weaken his political 
position, especially abroad. He even refused to have a specialist come to 
his home for a preliminary examination. To my knowledge he was never 
seriously examined at the time, but experimented with treating his 
symptoms by his own theories— which accorded, incidentally, with his 
inveterate bent for amateurish activities. 

On the other hand, when he suffered from increasing hoarseness 
he consulted the famous Berlin throat specialist Professor von Eicken. 
He underwent a thorough examination in his apartment in the Chancel- 
lery and was relieved when no cancer was detected. For months he had 
been referring to the fate of Emperor Frederick III, who died of cancer of 
the throat. The surgeon removed a harmless node. This minor operation 
also took place in Hitler s apartment. 

In 1935 Heinrich Hoffmann fell critically ill. Dr. Theodor Morell, an 
old acquaintance, tended him and cured him with sulfanilamides 3 which 
he obtained from Hungary. Hoffmann was forever telling Hitler about the 
wonderful doctor who had saved his life. Undoubtedly Hoffmann meant 
well, though one of MorelTs talents was his ability to exaggerate immod- 
erately any illness he cured, in order to cast his skill in the proper light. 

Dr. Morell alleged that he had studied under the famous bac- 
teriologist Ilya Mechnikov (1845-1916), Nobel Prize winner and professor 



105 ) The New Chancellery 

at the Pasteur Institute. 4 Mechnikov, he claimed, had taught him the art 
of combating bacterial diseases. Later, Morell had taken long voyages on 
passenger liners as a ship's doctor. Undoubtedly he was not an out-and- 
out quack— rather a bit of a screwball obsessed with making money. 

Hitler was persuaded to undergo an examination by Morell. The 
result surprised us all, for Hitler for the first time became convinced of 
a doctors importance. "Nobody has ever before told me so clearly 
and precisely what is wrong with me. His method of cure is so logical 
that I have the greatest confidence in him. I shall follow his prescriptions 
to the letter." The chief finding, so Hitler said, was that he suffered 
from complete exhaustion of the intestinal flora, which Morell attributed 
to the overburdening of his nervous system. If that were cured, all the 
other complaints would fade away. Morell, however, wished to ac- 
celerate the restorative process by injections of vitamins, hormones, 
phosphorus, and dextrose. The cure would take a year; only partial 
results could be expected in any shorter period. 

The most discussed medicine Hitler received henceforth consisted 
of capsules of intestinal bacteria, called "Multiflor ' which were, Morell 
assured him, "raised from the best stock of a Bulgarian peasant." The 
other injections and drugs he gave to Hitler were not generally known; 
they were only hinted at. We never felt entirely easy about these 
methods. Dr. Brandt asked around among his specialist friends, and 
they all pronounced Morell's methods risky and improved and foresaw 
dangers of addiction. And in fact the injections had to be given more 
and more frequently, and biologicals obtained from the testicles and 
intestines of animals, as well as from chemical and plant sources, were 
poured into Hitlers bloodstream. One day Goering deeply offended 
Morell by addressing him as "Herr Reich Injection Master." 

Soon after the beginning of the treatment, however, a foot rash 
vanished that had long caused Hitler much concern. After a few weeks 
Hitler s stomach also improved; he ate considerably more, and heavier 
dishes, felt better, and fervently declared: "What luck that I met 
Morell! He has saved my life. Wonderful, the way he has helped me!" 

If Hitler had the faculty for placing others under his spell, in this 
case the reverse relationship developed: Hitler was completely con- 
vinced of his personal physician s genius and soon forbade any criticism 
of the man. From then on Morell belonged to the intimate circle and 
became— when Hitler was not present— the butt of humor, since he 
could talk of nothing but strepto- and other cocci, of bulls' testicles 
and the newest vitamins. 

Hitler kept urging all his associates to consult Morell if they had 
the slightest ailments. In 1936, when my circulation and stomach re- 
belled against an irrational working rhythm and adjustment to Hitler's 
abnormal habits, I called at MorelTs private office. The sign at the 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 106 

entrance read: "Dr. Theodor Morell. Skin and Venereal Diseases." MorelTs 
office and home were situated in the smartest part of Kurfiirstendamm, 
near the Gedachtniskirche. The walls were hung with inscribed photo- 
graphs of well-known actors and film stars. The time I was there, I 
shared the waiting room with the Crown Prince. After a superficial 
examination Morell prescribed for me his intestinal bacteria, dextrose, 
vitamin, and hormone tablets. For safety's sake I afterward had a 
thorough examination by Professor von Bergmann, the specialist in 
internal medicine of Berlin University. I was not suffering from any 
organic trouble, he concluded, but only nervous symptoms caused by 
overwork. I slowed down my pace as best I could, and the symptoms 
abated. To avoid offending Hitler, I pretended that I was carefully 
following Morell's instructions, and since my health improved I became 
for a time Morell's showpiece. Hitler also had him examine Eva Braun. 
Afterward she told me that he was disgustingly dirty and vowed that she 
would not let Morell treat her again. 

Hitler's health improved only temporarily. But he would no longer 
part with his personal physician. On the contrary, Morell's country house 
on Schwanenwerder Island near Berlin became the goal of Hitler's teatime 
visits more and more frequently. It was the only place outside the 
Chancellery that continued to attract him. He visited Dr. Goebbels's 
very rarely and came to my place at Schlachtensee only once, to see the 
house I had built for myself. 

From the end of 1937 on, when Morell's treatments began to fail, 
Hitler resumed his old laments. Even as he gave assignments and 
discussed plans, he would occasionally add: "I don't know how long I 
am going to live. Perhaps most of these buildings will be finished only 
after I am no longer here. . . ." 5 The date for the completion of many 
of the major buildings had been fixed between 1945 and 1950. Evidently 
Hitler was counting on only a few more years of life. Another example: 
"Once I leave here ... I shall not have much more time." 6 In private 
one of his standard remarks became: "I shall not live much longer. I 
always counted on having time to realize my plans. I must carry them 
out myself. None of my successors will have the force to. I must carry 
out my aims as long as I can hold up, for my health is growing worse all 
the time." 

On May 2, 1938, Hitler drew up his personal will. He had already 
outlined his political testament on November 5, 1937, in the presence 
of the Foreign Minister and the military heads of the Reich. In that 
speech, he referred to his extensive plans for conquest as a "testamentary 
bequest in case of my decease." 7 With his intimate entourage, who night 
after night had to watch trivial operetta movies and listen to endless 
tirades on the Catholic Church, diet recipes, Greek temples, and police 
dogs, he did not reveal how literally he took his dream of world dominion. 



107 ) The New Chancellery 

Many of Hitler's former associates have since attempted to establish 
the theory that Hitler changed in 1938. They attribute the change to his 
deteriorated health resulting from MorelTs treatment. It seems to me, 
on the contrary, that Hitler's plans and aims never changed. Sickness and 
the fear of death merely made him advance his deadlines. His aims could 
only have been thwarted by superior counterforces, and in 1938 no such 
forces were visible. Quite the opposite: The successes of that year en- 
couraged him to go on forcing the already accelerated pace. 

The feverish haste with which Hitler pushed our building work 
seemed also connected with this inner unrest. At the Chancellery ridge- 
pole celebration he said to the workmen: "This is no longer the American 
tempo; it has become the German tempo. I like to think that I also 
accomplish more than other statesmen accomplish in the so-called democ- 
racies. I think we are following a different tempo politically, and if it is 
possible to annex a country to the Reich in three or four days, why it must 
be possible to erect a building in one or two years." Sometimes, how- 
ever, I wonder whether his excessive passion for building did not also 
serve the purpose of camouflaging his plans and deceiving the public 
by means of building schedules and cornerstone layings. 

I remember one occasion in 1938 when we were sitting in the 
Deutscher Hof in Nuremberg. Hitler spoke of the need to keep to one- 
self things not meant for the ears of the public. Among those present was 
Reichsleiter Philip Bouhler and his young wife. She objected that such 
restrictions surely did not apply to this group, since all of us knew 
how to keep any secret he confided to us. Hitler laughed and answered: 
"Nobody here knows how to keep his mouth shut, except for one person." 
And he indicated me. But there were things that happened in the next 
several months of which he breathed no word to me. 

On February 2, 1938, I saw the Commander in Chief of the Navy, 
Erich Raeder, crossing the main salon of the apartment, coming from a 
conference with Hitler. He looked utterly distraught. He was pale, 
staggering, like someone on the verge of a heart attack. On the day 
after next I learned from the newspapers that Foreign Minister von 
Neurath had been replaced by Ribbentrop and Army Commander in 
Chief von Fritsch by von Brauchitsch. Hitler personally had assumed 
the post of Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, replacing Field 
Marshal von Blomberg, and had made General Wilhelm Keitel his 
chief of staff. 

I was acquainted with Colonel General von Blomberg from Ober- 
salzberg; he was a pleasant, aristocratic looking man who enjoyed 
Hitler's esteem and had been treated with unusual amiability until his 
dismissal. In the autumn of 1937, at Hitler's suggestion, he had called 
at my office on Pariser Platz and looked over the plans and models 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 1()8 

for the rebuilding of Berlin. He listened calmly and with interest for 
about an hour. At the time he was accompanied by a general who 
seconded his chiefs every word by an approving nod of his head. This 
was Wilhelm Keitel, who had now become Hitlers closest military 
assistant in the High Command of the Armed Forces. Ignorant of 
military hierarchy, I had taken him for Blomberg's adjutant. 

About the same time Colonel General von Fritsch, whom I had not 
met up to then, asked me to call at his office on Bendlerstrasse. It 
was not curiosity alone that prompted him to ask to see the plans for 
Berlin. I spread them out on a large map table. Coolly and aloofly, 
with a military curtness that verged on unfriendliness, he listened to 
my explanations. From his questions, it appeared he was considering 
whether Hitlers vast building projects, extending over long periods 
of time, betokened any interest in preserving peace. But perhaps I was 
mistaken. 

I also did not know the Foreign Minister, Baron von Neurath. One 
day in 1937 Hitler decided that Neurath's villa was not adequate for the 
Foreign Minister s official duties and sent me to Frau von Neurath to 
offer to have the house significantly enlarged at government expense. 
She showed me through but stated in a tone of finality that in her 
opinion and that of the Foreign Minister it fully served its purpose; 
would I tell the Chancellor: "No, thank you." Hitler was annoyed and 
did not repeat the offer. Here for once a member of the old nobility 
was demonstrating confident modesty and deliberately abstaining from 
the craving for ostentation on the part of the new masters. The same 
was certainly not true of Ribbentrop, who in the summer of 1936 had 
me come to London where he wanted the German Embassy enlarged and 
modernized. He wished to have it finished in time for the coronation 
of George VI in the spring of 1937. There would no doubt be many parties 
given then, and he meant to impress London society by the sumptuousness 
of the embassy. Ribbentrop left the details to his wife, who indulged 
herself in such splendors with an interior decorator from Munich's 
United Workshops that I felt my services were superfluous. Toward me 
Ribbentrop took a conciliatory tone. But in those days in London he 
was always in a bad temper upon receiving cabled instructions from the 
Foreign Minister. This he regarded as pure meddling and would irritably 
and loudly declare that he cleared his actions with Hitler personally; the 
Fuehrer had directly assigned him to London. 

Even this early many of Hitlers political associates who hoped 
for good relations with England were beginning to think Ribbentrop was 
not the man for the job. In the autumn of 1937, Dr. Todt made an 
inspection trip of the various building sites for the autobahn, taking 
Lord Wolton along as guest. Afterward, it appeared that Lord Wolton 
expressed the wish, unofficially, to have Todt himself sent as ambassador 



109 ) The New Chancellery 

to London in Ribbentrop's place. So long as Ribbentrop remained, rela- 
tions would never improve, Lord Wolton said. We took care that Hitler 
heard of these remarks. He did not react. 

Soon after Ribbentrop's appointment as Foreign Minister, Hitler 
suggested that the old Foreign Ministers villa be torn down entirely, 
and the former palace of the Reich President be renovated for his of- 
ficial residence. Ribbentrop accepted the offer. 

I was in the salon of Hitler's Berlin apartment when the second 
event of this year, and one which testified to the acceleration in Hitlers 
political plans, began to unfold. The day was March 9, 1938. Hitlers 
adjutant, Schaub, sat at the radio listening to the Innsbruck speech of 
Dr. Schuschnigg, the Austrian Chancellor. Hitler had withdrawn to his 
private study on the second floor. Apparently Schaub was waiting for 
something in particular. He was taking notes. Schuschnigg spoke more 
and more plainly, finally presenting his plan for a plebiscite in Austria. 
The Austrian people themselves would decide for or against independence. 
And then Schuschnigg sounded the watchword to his fellow countrymen: 
"Austrians, the time has come!" 

The time had come for Schaub too; he rushed upstairs to Hitler. 
A short while later, Goebbels in full dress and Goering in gala uniform 
hustled in. They were coming from some party, for the Berlin season 
for balls was in full swing, and vanished upstairs for some mysterious 
conference. 

Once more enlightenment came to me several days later and via the 
newspapers. On March 13, German troops marched into Austria. Some 
three weeks later I too drove to Vienna by car to prepare the hall of 
the Northwest Railroad Station for a grand rally. Everywhere in towns 
and villages German cars were cheered. At the Hotel Imperial in Vienna 
I encountered the sordid hidden side of the rejoicing over the Anschluss. 
Many bigwigs from the Reich, such as Berlin Police Commissioner Count 
Helldorf, had hurried there, lured by the well-stocked shops. "They 
still have good underclothing. . . . Wool blankets, as many as you like. 
. . . I've discovered a place for foreign liqueurs. . . ." Scraps of the con- 
versations in the hotel lobby. I felt repelled and limited myself to buying a 
Borsalino. Did any of this concern me? 

Shortly after the annexation of Austria, Hitler sent for a map of 
Central Europe and showed his reverently listening entourage how 
Czechoslovakia was now caught in a "pincers." For years to come he 
would recall how magnanimously Mussolini had given his consent to the 
invasion of Austria. He would remain eternally grateful to the Duce for 
that, Hitler said. For Austria had been an invaluable buffer zone for 
Italy. To have German troops standing at the Brenner Pass would in the 
long run cause a certain strain. Hitlers Italian journey of 1938 was 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 110 

partly intended as an assurance of friendship. But he was also eager 
to see the monuments and art treasures of Rome and Florence. Resplen- 
dent uniforms were designed for the entourage and shown to Hitler. He 
loved such pomp; that his own dress was modest was a matter of careful 
strategy. "My surroundings must look magnificent. Then my simplicity 
makes a striking effect." About a year later Hitler turned to the stage 
designer Benno von Arent, known for his sets for opera and operettas, 
and had him design new uniforms for diplomats. He was pleased by the 
frock coats laden with gold braid. But wits remarked: "They look like 
a scene from Die Fledermaus." Arent also designed medals for Hitler; 
those too would have looked great on the stage. Thereafter I used to 
call Arent: "Tinsmith of the Third Reich." 

Back from Italy, Hitler summed up his impressions: "How glad I am 
that we have no monarchy and that I have never listened to those who 
have tried to talk me into one. Those court flunkies and that etiquette! 
It's awful. And the Duce always in the background. The best places 
at all the dinners and on the platforms are taken by the royal family. 
The Duce was always kept at a remove, and yet he is the one who 
really runs the government. ,, By diplomatic protocol Hitler, as Chief of 
State, was treated as of equal rank with the King, Mussolini only as 
Prime Minister. 

Even after the visit, Hitler felt obliged to do something special 
to honor Mussolini. He decided that Berlin's Adolf Hitler Platz would 
bear Mussolini's name after it had been incorporated into the major 
urban renewal project for Berlin. 8 Privately, he thought this square 
appalling, disfigured as it was by "modern" buildings of the Weimar Re- 
public. But: "If we rename it Mussolini Platz, I am rid of it, and besides 
it seems like an exceptional honor to cede my own square to the Duce. 
I already have designed a Mussolini monument for it!" Nothing came of 
the project, since the rebuilding plans were never carried out. 

The dramatic year 1938 led finally to Hitler's wresting the consent 
of the Western powers for the partition of Czechoslovakia. A few weeks 
before Hitler had put on an exceptionally effective performance at the 
Nuremberg Party Rally, playing the enraged leader of his nation; and 
supported by the frenzied applause of his followers, he tried to convince 
the contingent of foreign observers that he would not shrink from war. 
That was, judged with benefit of hindsight, intimidation on a grand 
scale. He had already tested this technique in his conference with 
Schuschnigg. On the other hand, he loved to sharpen his mettle by such 
audacities, going so far that he could no longer retreat without risking 
his prestige. 

This time he wanted even his closest associates to believe in his 
feint. He explained the various considerations to them and stressed 



in ) The New Chancellery 

the inevitability of a military showdown, whereas his usual behavior 
was to veil his basic intentions. What he said about his resolve for war 
impressed even Bruckner, his chief adjutant of many years. In September 
1938? during the Party Rally, I was sitting with Bruckner on a wall of 
Nuremberg Castle. Wreathed in smoke, the old city lay before us, in the 
mild September sunshine. Downcast, Bruckner remarked: "We may be 
seeing this peaceful scene for the last time. Probably we shall soon be at 
war." 

The war Bruckner was predicting was averted again more because 
of the compliance of the Western powers than because of any reasonable- 
ness on Hitler's part. The surrender of the Sudetenland to Germany took 
place before the eyes of a frightened world and of Hitlers followers, 
now completely convinced of their leader s invincibility. 

The Czech border fortifications caused general astonishment. To the 
surprise of experts a test bombardment showed that our weapons would 
not have prevailed against them. Hitler himself went to the former 
frontier to inspect the arrangements and returned impressed. The forti- 
fications were amazingly massive, he said, laid out with extraordinary 
skill and echeloned, making prime use of the terrain. "Given a resolute 
defense, taking them would have been very difficult and would have cost 
us a great many lives. Now we have obtained them without loss of blood. 
One thing is certain: I shall never again permit the Czechs to build a 
new defense line. What a marvelous starting position we have now. We 
are over the mountains and already in the valleys of Bohemia." 

On November 10, driving to the office, I passed by the still smoldering 
ruins of the Berlin synagogues. That was the fourth momentous event 
that established the character of this last of the prewar years. Today, this 
memory is one of the most doleful of my life, chiefly because what really 
disturbed me at the time was the aspect of disorder that I saw on 
Fasanenstrasse: charred beams, collapsed fa9ades, burned-out walls- 
anticipations of a scene that during the war would dominate much of 
Europe. Most of all I was troubled by the political revival of the "gutter." 
The smashed panes of shop windows offended my sense of middle-class 
order. 

I did not see that more was being smashed than glass, that on that 
night Hitler had crossed a Rubicon for the fourth time in his life, had 
taken a step that irrevocably sealed the fate of his country. Did I sense, 
at least for a moment, that something was beginning which would end 
with the annihilation of one whole group of our nation? Did I sense that 
this outburst of hoodlumism was changing my moral substance? I do 
not know. 

I accepted what had happened rather indifferently. Some phrases 
of Hitler s, to the effect that he had not wanted these excesses, con- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 112 

tributed to this attitude. Later, in private, Goebbels hinted that he had 
been the impresario for this sad and terrible night, and I think it very 
possible that he confronted a hesitant Hitler with a fait accompli in order 
to force him to take the initiative. 

It has repeatedly surprised me, in later years, that scarcely any 
anti-Semitic remarks of Hitlers have remained in my memory. Out of 
the scraps that remain, I can reconstruct what crossed my mind at the 
time: dismay over the deviation from the image I wanted to have of 
Hitler, anxiety over the increasing deterioration of his health, hope 
for some letup of the struggle against the churches, a certain puzzlement 
at his partiality for utopian-sounding remote goals, all sorts of odd feelings 
—but Hitlers hatred for the Jews seemed to me so much a matter of 
course that I gave it no serious thought. 

I felt myself to be Hitler s architect. Political events did not concern 
me. My job was merely to provide impressive backdrops for such events. 
And this view was reinforced daily, for Hitler consulted me almost exclu- 
sively on architectural questions. Moreover, it would have been regarded 
as self-importance on the part of a man who was pretty much of a late- 
comer in the party had I attempted to participate in the political dis- 
cussions. I felt that there was no need for me to take any political positions 
at all. Nazi education, furthermore, aimed at separatist thinking; I was 
expected to confine myself to the job of building. The grotesque extent 
to which I clung to this illusion is indicated by a memorandum of mine 
to Hitler as late as 1944: "The task I have to fulfill is an unpolitical one. 
I have felt at ease in my work only so long as my person and my work 
were evaluated solely by the standard of practical accomplishments." 9 

But fundamentally the distinction was inconsequential. Today it seems 
to me that I was trying to compartmentalize my mind. On the one hand 
there was the vulgar business of carrying out a policy proclaimed in the 
anti-Semitic slogans printed on streamers over the entrances to towns. 
On the other hand there was my idealized picture of Hitler. I wanted to 
keep these two apart. Actually, it did not matter, of course, who mobilized 
the rabble of the gutter to attack synagogues and Jewish businesses, it 
did not matter whether this happened at Hitler's direct instigation or 
merely with his approval. 

During the years after my release from Spandau I have been repeat- 
edly asked what thoughts I had on this subject during my two decades 
alone in the cell with myself; what I actually knew of the persecution, the 
deportation, and the annihilation of the Jews; what I should have known 
and what conclusions I ought to have drawn. 

I no longer give the answer with which I tried for so long to soothe 
the questioners, but chiefly myself: that in Hitler's system, as in every 
totalitarian regime, when a man s position rises, his isolation increases and 
he is therefore more sheltered from harsh reality; that with the applica- 
tion of technology to the process of murder the number of murderers is re- 



ii3 ) Th e N ew Chancellery 

duced and therefore the possibility of ignorance grows; that the craze for 
secrecy built into the system creates degrees of awareness, so it is easy 
to escape observing inhuman cruelties. 

I no longer give any of these answers. For they are efforts at legalistic 
exculpation. It is true that as a favorite and later as one of Hitler's most 
influential ministers I was isolated. It is also true that the habit of thinking 
within the limits of my own field provided me, both as architect and as 
Armaments Minister, with many opportunities for evasion. It is true that 
I did not know what was really beginning on November 9, 1938, and what 
ended in Auschwitz and Maidanek. But in the final analysis I myself 
determined the degree of my isolation, the extremity of my evasions, and 
the extent of my ignorance. 

I therefore know today that my agonized self -examinations posed 
the question as wrongly as did the questioners whom I have met since my 
release. Whether I knew or did not know, or how much or how little I 
knew, is totally unimportant when I consider what horrors I ought to have 
known about and what conclusions would have been the natural ones to 
draw from the little I did know. Those who ask me are fundamentally 
expecting me to offer justifications. But I have none. No apologies are 
possible. 

The New Chancellery was supposed to be finished on January 9. On 
January 7, Hitler came to Berlin from Munich. He came in a mood of 
great suspense and obviously expecting to find teams of workmen and 
cleaning squads rushing about. Everyone knows the frantic atmosphere 
at a building site shortly before the building is to be handed over to the 
occupant: scaffoldings being dismantled, dust and rubbish being removed, 
carpets being unrolled and pictures hung. But his expectations were de- 
ceived. From the start we had given ourselves a few days reserve. We 
did not need them and therefore were finished forty-eight hours before 
the official handing over of the building. Hitler could have sat down at 
his desk right then and there and begun working on the affairs of govern- 
ment. 

The building greatly impressed him. He highly praised the "genius of 
the architect" and, quite contrary to his habit, said so to me. But the fact 
that I had managed to finish the task two days early earned me the repu- 
tation of being a great organizer. 

Hitler especially liked the long tramp that state guests and diplo- 
mats would now have to take before they reached the reception hall. Un- 
like me, he was not worried about the polished marble floor, which I 
was reluctant to cover with a runner. "That's exactly right; diplomats 
should have practice in moving on a slippery surface." 

The reception hall struck him as too small; he wanted it tripled in 
size. The plans for this were ready at the beginning of the war. His study, 
on the other hand, met with his undivided approval. He was particularly 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 114 

pleased by an inlay on his desk representing a sword half drawn from 
its sheath. "Good, good. . . . When the diplomats sitting in front of me 
at this desk see that, they'll learn to shiver and shake. ,> 

From the gilded panels I had installed over the four doors of his 
study, four Virtues looked down on him: Wisdom, Prudence, Fortitude, 
and Justice. I don't know what suggested this idea to me. I had put two 
sculptures by Arno Breker in the Round Salon, flanking the portal to the 
Great Gallery. One of them represented Daring, the other Caring. 10 This 
rather pathetic hint on the part of my friend Breker that audacity should 
be tempered with responsibility, as well as my own allegorical reminder 
that bravery was a virtue but that the other virtues should not be for- 
gotten, showed how naively we overestimated the influence of art. But it 
also betrayed a certain uneasiness on our part over the course things were 
taking. 

A large marble-topped table stood by the window, useless for the 
time being. From 1944 on, military conferences were held at it. Here 
outspread strategic maps showed the rapid advance of the western and 
eastern enemies into the territory of the German Reich. This was Hitler's 
penultimate military headquarters; the ultimate one was located five 
hundred feet away, under many feet of concrete. The hall for cabinet 
meetings, completely paneled in wood for acoustic reasons, found favor 
with Hitler, but he never used it for the intended purpose. Every so often 
a cabinet minister asked me whether I could arrange for him at least to 
sfee "his" room. Hitler gave permission, and so now and then a minister 
would stand for a few minutes at the place he had never taken, where a 
large blue leather desk pad, with his name embossed in gold letters, lay 
on the conference table. 

Forty-five hundred workers had labored in two shifts to meet the 
deadline. There were several thousand more scattered over the country 
who had produced components. The whole work force, masons, carpen- 
ters, plumbers, and so on, were invited to inspect the building and filed 
awestruck through the finished rooms. Hitler addressed them in the 
Sportpalast: 

I stand here as representative of the German people. And whenever I 
receive anyone in the Chancellery, it is not the private individual Adolf Hitler 
who receives him, but the Leader of the German nation— and therefore it 
is not I who receive him, but Germany through me. For that reason I want 
these rooms to be in keeping with their high mission. Every individual has 
contributed to a structure that will outlast the centuries and will speak to 
posterity of our times. This is the first architectural creation of the new, 
great German Reich! 

After meals he frequently asked which of his guests had not yet seen 
the Chancellery, and he was delighted whenever he could show one of 



115 ) The New Chancellery 

them through. On such occasions he liked to show off his ability to store 
up data. Thus, he would begin by asking me: "How large is this room? 
How high?" I would shrug my shoulders in embarrassment, and he would 
give the measurements. They were exactly right. Gradually this developed 
into a prearranged game, since I too became adept at rattling off the 
figures. But since it obviously gave him pleasure, I played along. 

Hitlers honors to me increased. He arranged a dinner in his residence 
for my closest associates; he wrote an essay for a book on the Chancel- 
lery, conferred the Golden Party Badge on me, and with a few shy words 
gave me one of the watercolors he had done in his youth. A Gothic church 
done in 1909, it is executed in an extremely precise, patient, and pedantic 
style. No personal impulses can be felt in it; not a stroke has any verve. 
But it is not only the brush strokes that lack all character; by its choice of 
subject, the flat colors, the conventional perspective, the picture seems a 
candid witness to this early period of Hitler. All his watercolors from the 
same time have this quality, and even the watercolors done while he was 
an orderly in the First World War lack distinctiveness. The transformation 
in Hitlers personality, the growth of self-assurance, came later. It is evi- 
dent in the two pen sketches for the great hall in Berlin and for the tri- 
umphal arch, which he drew about 1925. Ten years later he would often 
sketch with a vigorous hand, using red and blue pencil, sometimes going 
over and over his drawing until he had forced his way through to the con- 
ception he had dimly in mind. Nevertheless he still thought well enough 
of the modest watercolors of his youth to give them away occasionally as 
a special distinction. 

For decades a marble bust of Bismarck by Reinhold Begas had stood 
in the Chancellery. A few days before the dedication of the new building, 
while workmen were moving the bust to the new headquarters, it dropped 
and broke off at the neck. I felt this as an evil omen. And since I had 
heard Hitlers story that right at the beginning of the First World War the 
Reich eagle had toppled from the post-office building, I kept the accident 
a secret and had Arno Breker make an exact copy. We gave it some patina 
by steeping it in tea. 

In the aforementioned speech Hitler made the following pronounce- 
ment: "This is the special and wonderful property of architecture: When 
the work has been done, a monument remains. That endures; it is some- 
thing different from a pair of boots, which also can be made, but which 
the wearer wears out in a year or two and then throws away. This re- 
mains, and through the centuries will bear witness to all those who helped 
to create it." On January 10, 1939, the new building destined to last for 
centuries was dedicated: Hitler received the diplomats accredited to 
Berlin in the Grand Salon and delivered his New Year address to them. 

Sixty-five days after the dedication, on March 15, 1939, the President 
of Czechoslovakia was ushered into Hitlers new study. This room was the 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( ll6 

scene of the tragedy which ended at night with Hacha's submission and 
early in the morning with the occupation of his country. "At last," Hitler 
reported later, "I had so belabored the old man that his nerves gave way 
completely, and he was on the point of signing; then he had a heart 
attack. In the adjoining room Dr. Morell gave him an injection, but in this 
case it was too effective. Hacha regained too much of his strength, revived, 
and was no longer prepared to sign, until I finally wore him down again." 

On July 16, 1945, seventy-eight months after the dedication, Winston 
Churchill was shown through the Chancellery. "In front of the Chancel- 
lery there was a considerable crowd. When I got out of the car and walked 
among them, except for one old man who shook his head disapprovingly, 
they all began to cheer. My hate had died with their surrender, and I was 
much moved by their demonstrations." Then the party walked for a good 
while through the shattered corridors and halls of the Chancellery. 

Soon afterward the remains of the building were removed. The stone 
and marble supplied the materials for the Russian war monument in 
Berlin-Treptow. 



9 

A Day in the Chancellery 



Between forty and fifty persons had access to hitler's afternoon 
dinner table in the Chancellery. They needed only to telephone his ad- 
jutant and say they would be coming. Usually they were the Gauleiters 
and Reichsleiters of the party, a few cabinet ministers, the members of the 
inner circle, but no army officers except for Hitlers Wehrmacht adjutant. 
More than once this adjutant, Colonel Schmundt, urged Hitler to allow 
the leading military men to dine with him; but Hitler would not have it. 
Perhaps he realized that the quality of his regular associates was such that 
the officers' corps would soon be looking down on them. 

I too had free admission to Hitlers residence and often availed my- 
self of it. The policeman at the entrance to the front garden knew my car 
and opened the gate without making inquiries; I would park my car in 
the yard and enter the apartment that Troost had rebuilt. It extended 
along the right side of the new Chancellery and was connected with it 
by a hall. 

The SS member of Hitlers escort squad greeted me familiarly. I 
would hand him my roll of drawings and then, unaccompanied, like some- 
one who belonged to the household, step into the spacious entrance hall: 
a room with two groups of comfortable seats, the white walls adorned with 
tapestries, the dark-red marble floor richly covered with rugs. There 
would usually be several guests there conversing, while others might be 
making private telephone calls. In general this room was favored because 
it was the only one where smoking was permitted. 

(»7) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( ll8 

It was not at all customary to use the otherwise mandatory "Heil 
Hitler" in greeting; a "Guten Tag" was far more common. The party lapel 
badge was also little flaunted in this circle, and uniforms were relatively 
seldom seen. Those who had penetrated as far as this privileged group 
could allow themselves a certain informality. 

Through a square reception salon, which thanks to its uncomfortable 
furniture remained unused, you reached the actual living room, where the 
guests would be chatting, usually standing. This room, about a thousand 
square feet in area, was the only one in the entire apartment furnished 
with a measure of Gemutlichkeit. Out of respect for its Bismarckian past 
it had been preserved during the major reconstruction of 1933-34 an d 
had a beamed ceiling, wood wainscoting, and a fireplace adorned by a 
Florentine Renaissance coat of arms which Chancellor von Bulow had 
once brought back from Italy. This was the only fireplace on the lower 
floor. Around it were grouped a sofa and chairs upholstered in dark 
leather; behind the sofa stood a largish table with a marble top on which 
several newspapers usually lay. A tapestry and two paintings by Schinkel 
hung on the walls. They had been lent by the National Gallery for the 
Chancellor s apartment. 

Hitler was royally unreliable about the time of his appearance. The 
dinner was usually set for about two o'clock, but it was apt to be three or 
later before Hitler arrived, sometimes from the upper private rooms of 
the apartment, often from a conference in the Chancellery. His entrance 
was as informal as that of any private individual. He greeted his guests 
by shaking hands; everyone gathered in a circle around him. He would 
express his opinion on one or another problem of the day; with a few 
favored guests he inquired, usually in a conventional tone, about the well- 
being of "your spouse." Then he took the news excerpts from his press 
chief, sat down off to one side, and began to read. Sometimes he would 
pass an excerpt on to one of the guests because the news seemed especially 
interesting to him, and would throw out a few casual remarks about it. 

The guests would continue to stand around for another fifteen or 
twenty minutes, until the curtain was drawn away from a glass door that 
led to the dining room. The house steward, a man with the encouraging 
bulk of a restaurateur, would inform Hitler quietly, in a tone in keeping 
with the whole unpublic atmosphere, that dinner was ready. The Fuehrer 
would lead the way; the others followed him into the dining room without 
any order of rank. 

Of all the rooms in the Chancellor s apartment that Professor Troost 
had redecorated, this large square dining room (forty by forty feet) was 
the most harmonious. A wall with three glass doors led out to the garden. 
Opposite was a large buffet of palisander wood; above it hung a painting 
by Kaulbach which had a certain charm because it was unfinished; at 



ii9 ) A Day in the Chancellery 

any rate it was without some of the embarrassing aspects of that eclectic 
painter. Each of the two other walls was marked by a shallow recess in 
which, on pedestals of marble, stood nude studies by the Munich sculptor 
Josef Wackerle. To either side of the recesses were more glass doors which 
led to the pantry, to a large salon, and into the living room from which 
we had come. Smoothly plastered walls, painted ivory, and equally light- 
colored curtains, produced a feeling of openness and brightness. Slight 
jogs in the walls carried out the clean, austere rhythm; a molding held it 
all together. The furnishing was restrained and restful: a large round table 
for about fifteen persons, ringed by simple chairs with dark red leather 
seats. The chairs were all alike, the host's no more elaborate than the rest. 
At the corners of the room stood four more small tables, each with from 
four to six similar chairs. The tableware consisted of light, plain china and 
simple glasses; both had been selected by Professor Troost before his 
death. A few flowers in a bowl formed the centerpiece. 

Such was the "Merry Chancellor s Restaurant," as Hitler often called 
it in speaking to his guests. He had his seat on the window side of the 
room, and before entering would select which of the guests would be 
seated at his side. All the rest sat down around the table wherever they 
found a place. If many guests came, the adjutants and persons of lesser 
importance, among whom I belonged, took seats at the side tables— an 
advantage, I always thought, since there we could talk with less con- 
straint. 

The food was emphatically simple. A soup, no appetizer, meat with 
vegetables and potatoes, a sweet. For beverage we had a choice between 
mineral water, ordinary Berlin bottled beer, or a cheap wine. Hitler 
was served his vegetarian food, drank Fachinger mineral water, and 
those of his guests who wished could imitate him. But few did. It was 
Hitler himself who insisted on this simplicity. He could count on its being 
talked about in Germany. Once, when the Helgoland fishermen presented 
him with a gigantic lobster, this delicacy was served at table, much to the 
satisfaction of the guests, but Hitler made disapproving remarks about 
the human error of consuming such ugly monstrosities. Moreover, he 
wanted to have such luxuries forbidden, he declared. 

Goering seldom came to these meals. Once, when I left him to go to 
dinner at the Chancellery, he remarked: "To tell the truth, the food there 
is too rotten for my taste. And then, these party dullards from Munich! 
Unbearable." 

Hess came to table about once every two weeks; he would be 
followed by his adjutant in a rather weird getup, carrying a tin vessel 
containing a specially prepared meal which was to be rewarmed in the 
kitchen. For a long time it was hidden from Hitler that Hess had his 
own special vegetarian meal served to himself. When someone finally 
gave the secret away, Hitler turned irritably to Hess in the presence of 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 120 

the assembled company and blustered: "I have a first-class diet cook here. 
If your doctor has prescribed something special for you, she will be glad 
to prepare it. But you cannot bring your food with you." Hess, even then 
inclining to obstinate contrariness, began explaining that the components 
of his meals had to be of special biodynamic origin. Whereupon Hitler 
bluntly informed him that in that case he should take his meals at home. 
Thereafter Hess scarcely ever came to the dinners. 

When, at the instance of the party, word was sent out that all house- 
holds in Germany should eat a one-dish meal on Sundays, thereby pro- 
moting guns instead of butter, only a tureen of soup was served at 
Hitlers table too. The number of Sunday guests thereafter shrank to two 
or three, which provoked some sarcastic remarks from Hitler about the 
spirit of sacrifice among his associates. For there would also be a list 
passed around the table, with every guest pledging his donation to the 
war effort. Every one-dish meal cost me fifty or a hundred marks. 

Goebbels was the most prominent guest at table; Himmler seldom 
came; Bormann of course never missed a meal, but like me he belonged 
to the inner group of courtiers and could not be considered a guest. 

Here, too, Hitlers conversation at table did not go beyond the very 
narrow range of subjects and the limited point of view that made the 
Obersalzberg talk so wearisome. In Berlin he tended to phrase his opinions 
more harshly, but the repertory remained the same; he neither extended 
nor deepened it, scarcely ever enriched it by new approaches and insights. 
He did not even try to cover up the frequent repetitions which were so 
embarrassing to his listeners. I cannot say that I found his remarks im- 
pressive, even though I was still captivated by his personality. What he 
said rather sobered me, for I had expected opinions and judgments of 
higher quality. 

In these monologues he frequently asserted that his political, artistic, 
and military ideas formed a unity which he had developed in detail be- 
tween the ages of twenty and thirty. That had been intellectually his most 
fertile period, he said; the things he was now planning and doing were 
only the execution of the ideas of that period. 

In the table talk much weight was given to experiences in the First 
World War. Most of the guests had served during the war. For a time 
Hitler had been in the trenches opposite the British forces, whose bravery 
and determination had won his respect, although he also often made fun 
of their idiosyncrasies. Thus he liked to relate with heavy irony that they 
were in the habit of stopping their artillery fire exactly at teatime, so that 
he as a courier was always able to carry out his errands safely at that hour. 

In 1938 he expressed no ideas of revenge upon the French; he did 
not want a rerun of the war of 1914. It was not worth waging another 
war, he said, over that insignificant strip of territory constituting Alsace- 
Lorraine. Besides, he would add, the Alsatians had become so character- 



121 ) A Day in the Chancellery 

less due to the constant shifting of their nationality that it would be a 
gain to neither side to have them. They ought to be left where they were. 
In saying this, of course, Hitler was assuming that Germany could expand 
to the east. The bravery of the French soldiers had impressed him in the 
First World War; only the officer corps was morally enfeebled. "With 
German officers the French would be a splendid army. ,, 

He did not exactly repudiate the alliance with Japan— from the racist 
point of view a dubious affair— but he took a tone of reserve toward it as 
far as the more distant future was concerned. Whenever he touched on 
this theme, he implied that he was somewhat sorry about having made 
an alliance with the so-called yellow race. But then he would remind 
himself that England, too, had mobilized Japan against the Central 
Powers in the World War. Hitler considered Japan an ally that ranked 
as a world power, whereas he was not convinced that Italy was in the 
same class. 

The Americans had not played a very prominent part in the war of 
1914-18, he thought, and moreover had not made any great sacrifices of 
blood. They would certainly not withstand a great trial by fire, for their 
fighting qualities were low. In general, no such thing as an American 
people existed as a unit; they were nothing but a mass of immigrants 
from many nations and races. 

Fritz Wiedemann, who had once been regimental adjutant and 
superior to Hitler in his days as a courier and whom Hitler had now with 
signal lack of taste made his own adjutant, thought otherwise and kept 
urging Hitler to have talks with the Americans. Vexed by this offense 
against the unwritten law of the round table, Hitler finally sent him to 
San Francisco as German consul general. "Let him be cured of his notions 
there." 

Those who took part in these table conversations were almost to a 
man without cosmopolitan experience. Most had never been outside 
Germany; if one of them had taken a pleasure trip to Italy, the matter 
was discussed at Hitler s table as if it were an event and the person in 
question was considered a foreign affairs expert. Hitler, too, had seen 
nothing of the world and had acquired neither knowledge nor under- 
standing of it. Moreover, the average party politician lacked higher edu- 
cation. Of the fifty Reichsleiters and Gauleiters, the elite of the leadership, 
only ten had completed a university education, a few had attended uni- 
versity classes for a while, and the majority had never gone beyond 
secondary school. Virtually none of them had distinguished himself by any 
notable achievement in any field whatsoever. Almost all displayed an 
astonishing intellectual dullness. Their educational standard certainly did 
not correspond to what might be expected of the top leadership of a 
nation with a traditionally high intellectual level. Basically, Hitler pre- 
ferred to have people of the same origins as himself in his immediate 
entourage; no doubt he felt most at ease among them. In general he was 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 122 

pleased if his associates showed some "flaw in the weave," as we called it 
at the time. As Hanke commented one day: "It is all to the good if associ- 
ates have faults and know that the superior is aware of them. That is why 
the Fuehrer so seldom changes his assistants. For he finds them easiest to 
work with. Almost every one of them has his defect; that helps keep them 
in line." Immoral conduct, remote Jewish ancestors, or recent membership 
in the party were counted as flaws in the weave. 

Hitler would often theorize to the effect that it was a mistake to 
export ideas such as National Socialism. To do so would only lead to a 
strengthening of nationalism in other countries, he said, and thus to a 
weakening of his own position. He was glad to see that the Nazi parties 
of other countries produced no leader of his own caliber. He considered 
the Dutch Nazi leader Mussert and Sir Oswald Mosley, chief of the British 
Nazi party, mere copyists who had had no original or new ideas. They 
only imitated us and our methods slavishly, he commented, and would 
never amount to anything. In every country you had to start from different 
premises and change your methods accordingly, he argued. He had a 
better opinion of Degrelle, but did not expect much of him either. 

Politics, for Hitler, was purely pragmatic. He did not except his own 
book of confessions and professions, Mein Kampf, from this general rule. 
Large parts of it were no longer valid, he said. He should not have let 
himself be pinned down to definite statements so early. After hearing that 
remark I gave up my fruitless efforts to read the book. 

When ideology receded into the background after the seizure of 
power, efforts were made to tame down the party and make it more re- 
spectable. Goebbels and Bormann were the chief opponents of that 
tendency. They were always trying to radicalize Hitler ideologically. To 
judge by his speeches, Ley must also have belonged to the group of tough 
ideologists, but lacked the stature to gain any significant influence. 
Himmler, on the other hand, obviously was going his own absurd way, 
which was compounded of beliefs about an original Germanic race, a 
brand of elitism, and an assortment of health-food notions. The whole 
thing was beginning to assume far-fetched pseudoreligious forms. 
Goebbels, with Hitler, took the lead in ridiculing these dreams of 
Himmler's, with Himmler himself adding to the comedy by his vanity and 
obsessiveness. When, for example, the Japanese presented him with a 
samurai sword, he at once discovered kinships between Japanese and 
Teutonic cults and called upon scientists to help him trace these similari- 
ties to a racial common denominator. 

Hitler was particularly concerned with the question of how he could 
assure his Reich a new generation of followers committed to his ideas. 
The general outlines of a plan were drafted by Ley, to whom Hitler had 
also entrusted the organization of the educational system. Adolf Hitler 
Schools were established for the elementary grades and Ordensburgen 
(Order Castles) for higher education. These were meant to turn out a 



123 ) A Day ™ the Chancellery 

technically and ideologically trained elite. To be sure, all this elite would 
have been good for was positions in a bureaucratic party administration, 
since thanks to their isolated and specialized education the young people 
knew nothing about practical life, while on the other hand their arrogance 
and conceit about their own abilities were boundless. It was significant 
that the high party functionaries did not send their own children into 
these schools; even so fanatical a party member as Gauleiter Sauckel re- 
frained from launching a single one of his many boys on such a course. 
Conversely, Bormann sent one of his sons to an Adolf Hitler School as 
punishment. 

In Bormann s mind, the Kirchenkampf, the campaign against the 
churches, was useful for reactivating party ideology which had been lying 
dormant. He was the driving force behind this campaign, as was time and 
again made plain to our round table. Hitler was hesitant, but only because 
he would rather postpone this problem to a more favorable time. Here in 
Berlin, surrounded by male cohorts, he spoke more coarsely and bluntly 
than he ever did in the midst of his Obersalzberg entourage. "Once I have 
settled my other problems," he occasionally declared, 'Til have my reckon- 
ing with the church. Ill have it reeling on the ropes." 

But Bormann did not want this reckoning postponed. Brutally direct 
himself, he could ill tolerate Hitlers prudent pragmatism. He therefore 
took every opportunity to push his own projects. Even at meals he broke 
the unspoken rule that no subjects were to be raised which might spoil 
Hitlers humor. Bormann had developed a special technique for such 
thrusts. He would draw one of the members of the entourage into telling 
him about seditious speeches a pastor or bishop had delivered, until Hitler 
finally became attentive and demanded details. Bormann would reply 
that something unpleasant had happened and did not want to bother 
Hitler with it during the meal. At this Hitler would probe further, while 
Bormann pretended that he was reluctantly letting the story be dragged 
from him. Neither the angry looks from his fellow guests nor Hitler s 
gradually flushing face deterred him from going on. At some point he 
would take a document from his pocket and begin reading passages from 
a defiant sermon or a pastoral letter. Frequently Hitler became so worked 
up that he began to snap his fingers— a sure sign of his anger— pushed away 
his food and vowed to punish the offending clergyman eventually. He 
could much more easily put up with foreign indignation and criticism than 
opposition at home. That he could not immediately retaliate raised him to 
a white heat, though he usually managed to control himself quite well. 

Hitler had no humor. He left joking to others, although he could laugh 
loudly, abandonedly, sometimes literally writhing with laughter. Often 
he would wipe tears from his eyes during such spasms. He liked laughing, 
but it was always laughter at the expense of others. 

Goebbels was skilled at entertaining Hitler with jokes while at the 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 124 

same time demolishing any rivals in the internal struggle for power. "You 
know," he once related, "the Hitler Youth asked us to issue a press release 
for the twenty-fifth birthday of its staff chief, Lauterbacher. So I sent 
along a draft of the text to the effect that he had celebrated this birthday 
'enjoying full physical and mental vigor/ We heard no more from him." 
Hitler doubled up with laughter, and Goebbels had achieved his end of 
cutting the conceited youth leader down to size. 

To the dinner guests in Berlin, Hitler repeatedly talked about his 
youth, emphasizing the strictness of his upbringing. "My father often 
dealt me hard blows. Moreover, I think that was necessary and helped 
me." Wilhelm Frick, the Minister of the Interior, interjected in his bleat- 
ing voice: "As we can see today, it certainly did you good, mein Fiihrer!' 
A numb, horrified silence around the table. Frick tried to save the situa- 
tion: "I mean, mein Fiihrer, that is why you have come so far." Goebbels, 
who considered Frick a hopeless fool, commented sarcastically: "I would 
guess you never received a beating in your youth, Frick." 

Walther Funk, who was both Minister of Economics and president of 
the Reichsbank, told stories about the outlandish pranks that his vice presi- 
dent, Brinkmann, had gone on performing for months, until it was finally 
realized that he was mentally ill. In telling such stories Funk not only 
wanted to amuse Hitler but to inform him in this casual way of events 
which would sooner or later reach his ears. Brinkmann, it seemed, had 
invited the cleaning women and messenger boys of the Reichsbank to a 
grand dinner in the ballroom of the Hotel Bristol, one of the best hotels 
in Berlin, where he played the violin for them. This sort of thing rather 
fitted in with the regime's propaganda of all Germans forming one "folk 
community." But as everyone at table laughed, Funk continued: "Re- 
cently he stood in front of the Ministry of Economics on Unter den Linden, 
took a large package of newly printed banknotes from his briefcase— as 
you know, the notes bear my signature— and gave them out to passers-by, 
saying: *Who wants some of the new Funks?* "* Shortly afterward, Funk 
continued, the poor man's insanity had become plain for all to see. He 
called together all the employees of the Reichsbank. " 'Everyone older 
than fifty to the left side, the younger employees to the right/ " Then, to 
one man on the right side: "'How old are you?*— 'Forty-nine sir/— Tfou 
go to the left too. Well now, all on the left side are dismissed at once, and 
what is more with a double pension/ " 

Hitler s eyes filled with tears of laughter. When he had recovered, 
he launched into a monologue on how hard it sometimes is to recognize 
a madman. In this roundabout way Funk was also accomplishing another 
end. Hitler did not yet know that the Reichsbank vice president in his 
irresponsible state had given Goering a check for several million marks. 

* A pun in German; Furiken = sparks.— Translators' note. 



125 ) A Day in the Chancellery 

Goering cashed the check without a qualm. Later on, of course, Goering 
vehemently objected to the thesis that Brinkmann did not know what he 
was doing. Funk could expect him to present this point of view to Hitler. 
Experience had shown that the person who first managed to suggest a 
particular version of an affair to Hitler had virtually won his point, for 
Hitler never liked to alter a view he had once expressed. Even so, Funk 
had difficulties recovering those millions of marks from Goering. 

A favorite target of Goebbels's jokes and the subject of innumerable 
anecdotes was Rosenberg, whom Goebbels liked to call "the Reich philos- 
opher." On this subject Goebbels could be sure that Hitler agreed with 
him. He therefore took up the theme so frequently that the stories re- 
sembled carefully rehearsed theatrical performances in which the various 
actors were only waiting for their cues. Hitler was almost certain to inter- 
ject at some point: "The Volkischer Beobachter is just as boring as its 
editor, Rosenberg. You know, we have a so-called humor sheet in the 
party, Die Brennessel. The dreariest rag imaginable. And on the other 
hand the VB is nothing but a humor sheet." Goebbels also made game of 
the printer Miiller, who was doing his best both to keep the party and not 
to lose his old customers, who came from strictly Catholic circles in Upper 
Bavaria. His printing program was certainly versatile, ranging from pious 
calendars to Rosenberg's antichurch writings. But Miiller was allowed 
considerable leeway; in the twenties he had gone on printing the Vol- 
kischer Beobachter no matter how large the bill grew. 

Many jokes were carefully prepared, tied up as they were with actual 
events, so that Hitler was kept abreast of interparty developments under 
the guise of foolery. Again, Goebbels was far better at this than all the 
others, and Hitler gave him further encouragement by showing that he 
was very much amused. 

An old party member, Eugen Hadamowski, had obtained a key 
position as Reichssendeleiter (Head of Broadcasting for the Reich), but 
now he was longing to be promoted to Leiter des Reichsrundfunks (Head 
of the Reich Radio System). The Propaganda Minister, who had another 
candidate, was afraid that Hitler might back Hadamowski because he 
had skillfully organized the public address systems for the election cam- 
paigns before 1933. He had Hanke, state secretary in the Propaganda 
Ministry, send for the man and officially informed him that Hitler had just 
appointed him Reichsintendant (General Director) for radio. At the table 
Hitler was given an account of how Hadamowski had gone wild with joy 
at this news. The description was, no doubt, highly colored and exagger- 
ated, so that Hitler took the whole affair as a great joke. Next day Goeb- 
bels had a few copies of a newspaper printed reporting on the sham 
appointment and praising the new appointee in excessive terms. He out- 
lined the article for Hitler, with all its ridiculous phrases, and acted out 
Hadamowski's rapture upon reading these things about himself. Once 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 126 

more Hitler and the whole table with him was convulsed. That same day 
Hanke asked the newly appointed Reichsintendant to make a speech into 
a dead microphone, and once again there was endless merriment at 
Hitler s table when the story was told. After this, Goebbels no longer had 
to worry that Hitler would intervene in favor of Hadamowski. It was a 
diabolic game; the ridiculed man did not have the slightest opportunity 
to defend himself and probably never realized that the practical joke was 
carefully plotted to make him unacceptable to Hitler. No one could even 
know whether what Goebbels was describing was true or whether he was 
giving his imagination free rein. 

From one point of view, Hitler was the real dupe of these intrigues. 
As far as I could observe, Hitler was in fact no match for Goebbels in 
such matters; with his more direct temperament he did not understand 
this sort of cunning. But it certainly should have given one pause that 
Hitler allowed this nasty game to go on and even encouraged it. One word 
of displeasure would certainly have stopped this sort of thing for a long 
while to come. 

I often asked myself whether Hitler was open to influence. He surely 
could be swayed by those who knew how to manage him. Hitler was 
mistrustful, to be sure. But he was so in a cruder sense, it often seemed 
to me; for he did not see through clever chess moves or subtle manipula- 
tion of his opinions. He had apparently no sense for methodical deceit. 
Among the masters of that art were Goering, Goebbels, Bormann, and, 
within limits, Himmler. Since those who spoke out in candid terms on the 
important questions usually could not make Hitler change his mind, the 
cunning men naturally gained more and more power. 

Let me conclude my account of afternoon dinners in the Chancellery 
by relating another joke of this perfidious type. This time the target was 
the foreign press chief, Putzi Hanfstaengl, whose close personal ties with 
Hitler were a source of uneasiness to Goebbels. Goebbels began casting 
aspersions on Hanfstaengl's character, representing him as miserly, money 
grubbing, and of dubious honesty. He once brought in a phonograph 
record of an English song and attempted to prove that Hanfstaengl had 
stolen its melody for a popular march he had composed. 

The foreign press chief was already under a cloud when Goebbels, 
at the time of the Spanish Civil War, told the table company that Hanf- 
staengl had made adverse remarks about the fighting spirit of the German 
soldiers in combat there. Hitler was furious. This cowardly fellow who had 
no right to judge the courage of others must be given a lesson, he declared. 
A few days later Hanfstaengl was informed that he must make a plane 
trip; he was given sealed orders from Hitler which were not to be opened 
until after the plane had taken off. Once in the air, Hanfstaengl read, 
horrified, that he was to be put down in "Red Spanish territory" where 
he was to work as an agent for Franco. At the table Goebbels told Hitler 



127 ) -A Day in the Chancellery 

every detail: How Hanfstaengl pleaded with the pilot to turn back; it 
must all be a misunderstanding, he insisted. But the plane, Goebbels 
related, continued circling for hours over German territory, in the clouds. 
The passenger was given false location reports, so that he believed he was 
approaching closer and closer to Spanish territory. Finally the pilot an- 
nounced that he had to make an emergency landing and set the plane 
down safely at Leipzig airport. Hanfstaengl, who only then realized that 
he had been the victim of a bad joke, began asserting that there was a 
plot against his life and soon afterward vanished without a trace. 

All the chapters in this story elicited great merriment at Hitler's table 
—all the more so since in this case Hitler had plotted the joke together 
with Goebbels. But when word came a few days later that the missing 
press chief had sought asylum abroad, Hitler became afraid that Hanf- 
staengl would collaborate with the foreign press and profit by his inti- 
mate knowledge of the Third Reich. But for all his reputation for money 
grubbing, Hanfstaengl did nothing of the sort. 

I, too, found myself going along with this streak in Hitler, who 
seemed to enjoy destroying the reputation and self-respect of even his 
close associates and faithful comrades in the struggle for power. But 
although I was still under Hitler's spell, my feeling had evolved consider- 
ably from what it had been during the early years of our association. See- 
ing him daily as I did, I acquired some perspective and occasionally a 
capacity for critical observation. 

My close relation with him, moreover, centered increasingly around 
architecture. To be able to serve him with all my ability and to translate 
his architectural ideas into reality still filled me with enthusiasm. In 
addition, the larger and more important my building assignments became, 
the more respect others paid me. I was on the way, I thought at the time, 
to creating a body of work that would place me among the most famous 
architects of history. My sense of this also made me feel that I was not 
just the recipient of Hitler's favor. Rather, I was offering him a return 
of equal value for having established me as an architect. What is more, 
Hitler treated me like a colleague and often made it clear that I stood 
above him where architecture was concerned. 

Dining with Hitler regularly meant a considerable loss of time, for 
we sat at table until half past four in the afternoon. Naturally, hardly 
anyone could afford to squander so much time every day. I too went to 
the meals no more than once or twice a week, for otherwise I would have 
had to neglect my work. 

Yet it was important for one's prestige to attend these dinners. More- 
over, it was important to most of the guests to be kept abreast of Hitler s 
daily opinions. The round table was useful to Hitler himself as well, for 
in this way he could casually and effortlessly hand down a political line 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 128 

or slogan. On the other hand, Hitler was apt to speak little about his own 
work, say about the outcome of an important conference. Whenever he 
did allude to such matters, it was usually for the purpose of commenting 
critically upon an interlocutor. 

Some of the guests would throw out their bait during the meal itself, 
in hopes of being granted a special interview with Hitler. They would 
mention that they had brought along photographs of the latest stage of 
a building project. Other favorite baits were photographs of the sets for 
some newly staged work, preferably a Wagner opera or an operetta. But 
the infallible attraction was always: "Mein Fuhrer, I have brought you 
new building plans." The guest who said that could be fairly certain that 
Hitler would reply: "Oh, good, show them to me right after dinner." To 
be sure, the other diners frowned on such direct approaches. But other- 
wise one might wait for months before receiving an official appointment 
to see Hitler. 

When the meal was over, Hitler rose, the guests said brief good-bys, 
and the favored guest was led into the adjacent salon, which for some 
inexplicable reason was called the "conservatory." On such occasions 
Hitler would often say to me: "Wait a moment. There's something I'd like 
to discuss with you." The moment often turned into an hour or more. 
Then Hitler would have me called in. Now he behaved quite informally, 
sat opposite me in one of the comfortable chairs and inquired about the 
progress of my buildings. 

By this time it was often six o'clock. Hitler went to his rooms on the 
upper floor, while I drove to my office, frequently for only a short time. 
The adjutant might telephone to say that Hitler had asked me to come to 
supper, which meant I had to return to the Chancellor's apartment two 
hours later. But often, when I had plans to show, I went unasked. 

From six to eight persons would assemble on those evenings: his 
adjutants, his doctor, the photographer Hoffmann, one or two Munich 
acquaintances, quite often Hitler's pilot Bauer along with his radio man 
and onboard mechanic, and the inevitable Bormann. This was the most 
private circle in Berlin, for political associates such as Goebbels were 
usually not wanted in the evenings. The level of the conversations was a 
distinct stage lower than at the afternoon affairs. The talk wandered off 
into trivialities. Hitler liked to hear about the theater. Scandals also in- 
terested him. The pilot talked about flying; Hoffmann contributed anec- 
dotes about Munich artistic circles and reported on his art collecting. But 
usually Hitler would tell stories about his life and development. 

The meal again consisted of simple dishes. Kannenberg, the house 
steward, did try a few times to serve better food for these rather pri- 
vate meals. For a few weeks Hitler actually ate caviar by the spoonful 
with gusto, and praised the taste, which was new to him. But then he 
asked Kannenberg about the price, was horrified, and gave strict orders 



129 ) A Day in the Chancellery 

against having that again. Thereupon the cheaper red caviar was served 
him, but that too he rejected as an extravagance. To be sure, these ex- 
penses were insignificant in comparison with the total outlay for the 
Chancellor's household. But the idea of a caviar-eating Leader was incom- 
patible with Hitler s conception of himself. 

After supper the company moved into the salon, which was other- 
wise reserved for official occasions. Everyone settled into easy chairs; 
Hitler unbuttoned his jacket and stretched out his legs. The lights slowly 
dimmed, while household employees, including some of the women, and 
members of Hitler s bodyguard were admitted through a rear door. The 
first movie began. There we sat, as at Obersalzberg, mute for some three 
or four hours, and when these films came to an end at about one in the 
morning, we stood up stiff and dazed. Hitler alone seemed sprightly; he 
discoursed on the actors' performances, spoke appreciatively of the art of 
one of his favorite actors, then went on to other subjects. The conversa- 
tion was continued at a sluggish pace in the small drawing room. Beer, 
wine, and sandwiches were handed around, until Hitler at last said good 
night at about two o'clock in the morning. I frequently reflected that 
this mediocre group was assembling at the same spot where Bismarck 
used to talk brilliantly with friends and political associates. 

A few times I suggested inviting a famous pianist or a scientist, 
in order to introduce a new element into the monotony of these evenings. 
But Hitler always fended off anything of this sort. "The artists would 
not be so eager to come as they say." In fact many of them would have 
regarded such an invitation as a distinction. Probably Hitler did not 
want to have the sluggish, banal conclusion of his daily routine dis- 
turbed; he was fond of it. Moreover, I often observed that Hitler felt a 
certain shyness toward people of high standing in some professional 
field. He did receive them occasionally, but in the reserved atmosphere 
of an official audience. Perhaps that was one of the reasons he had 
picked out so very young an architect as myself. He did not feel such an 
inferiority complex toward me. 

During the early years after 1933 the adjutants were permitted to 
invite ladies, some of them screen stars selected by Goebbels. But as a 
rule only married women were admitted, usually with their husbands. 
Hitler followed this rule in order to forestall rumors which might harm 
the image shaped by Goebbels of a Leader whose style of life was 
absolutely respectable. Toward these women Hitler behaved rather 
like the graduate of a dance class at the final dance. He displayed 
a shy eagerness to do nothing wrong, to offer a sufficient number of 
compliments, and to welcome them and bid them good-by with the 
Austrian kissing of the hand. When the party was over, he usually sat 
around for a while with his private circle to rave a bit about the women. 
He spoke more about their figures than their charm or cleverness, and 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 130 

always there was something in his tone of the schoolboy who is con- 
vinced that his wishes are unattainable. Hitler loved tall, full-figured 
women; Eva Braun, who was rather small and delicate of build, was 
actually not at all his type. 

Abruptly, some time in 1935, as I recall, this practice ceased from 
one day to the next. I never learned the reason for this; perhaps it was 
due to some gossip. Whatever the reason, Hitler suddenly announced 
that henceforth the invitations to women were to stop. From then on he 
contented himself with the stars in the nightly movies. 

Around 1939 Eva Braun was assigned a bedroom in the Berlin 
residence. It adjoined his; the windows looked out on a narrow court- 
yard. Here even more than in Obersalzberg she led a completely isolated 
life, stealing into the building through a side entrance and going up a 
rear staircase, never descending into the lower rooms, even when there 
were only old acquaintances in the apartment, and she was overjoyed 
whenever I kept her company during her long hours of waiting. 

In Berlin, Hitler very seldom went to the theater, except to see 
operettas. He would never miss a new production of the by now classical 
operettas such as Die Fledermaus and The Merry Widow. I am certain 
that I saw Die Fledermaus with him at least five or six times in cities 
all over Germany. He customarily contributed considerable sums from 
Bormann s privy purse to have the operetta put on in lavish style. 

In addition he liked revues. He went to the Wintergarten several 
times to attend a Berlin variety show and would certainly have gone 
more frequently but for the fact that he was embarrassed to be seen there. 
Sometimes he sent his house steward in his place and then late in the 
evening would look over the program and ask for an account of what 
had gone on. Several times he also went to the Metropol Theater which 
put on insipid musicals with plenty of scantily clad girls. 

During the Bayreuth Festival every year he attended every single 
performance of the first cycle. It seemed to a musical layman like myself 
that in his conversations with Frau Winifred Wagner he displayed 
knowledge about musical matters in detail; but he was even more con- 
cerned about the directing. 

Aside from Bayreuth, however, he very seldom attended performances 
of operas, and his initially rather keen interest in theater also dwindled. 
Even his enthusiasm for Bruckner never seemed very marked and im- 
posed no obligations on others. Although a movement from a Bruckner 
symphony was played before each of his "cultural speeches" at the 
Nuremberg Party Rallies, for the rest he merely took care that Bruckner's 
works continued to be fostered at St. Florian. He saw to it, however, that 
his public image of a man passionately devoted to art was cultivated. 

I never found out whether and to what extent Hitler had an interest 
in literature. Mostly he talked about books on military science, naval 



131 ) A Day in the Chancellery 

matters and architecture, which he would pore over with great interest 
during the night hours. On other books he made no comment. 

I myself threw all my strength into my work and was baffled at 
first by the way Hitler squandered his working time. I could understand 
that he might wish his day to trail off in boredom and pastimes; but 
to my notion this phase of the day, averaging some six hours, proved 
rather long, whereas the actual working session was by comparison 
relatively short. When, I would often ask myself, did he really work? 
Little was left of the day; he rose late in the morning and conducted 
one or two official conferences; but from the subsequent dinner on he 
more or less wasted time until the early hours of the evening. 1 His rare 
appointments in the late afternoon were imperiled by his passion for 
looking at building plans. The adjutants often asked me: "Please don't 
show any plans today." Then the drawings I had brought with me would 
be left by the telephone switchboard at the entrance, and I would reply 
evasively to Hitler's inquiries. Sometimes he saw through this game and 
would himself go to look in the anteroom or the cloakroom for my roll 
of plans. 

In the eyes of the people Hitler was the Leader who watched over 
the nation day and night. This was hardly so. But Hitler's lax scheduling 
could be regarded as a life style characteristic of the artistic temperament. 
According to my observations, he often allowed a problem to mature dur- 
ing the weeks when he seemed entirely taken up with trivial matters. 
Then, after the "sudden insight" came, he would spend a few days of 
intensive work giving final shape to his solution. No doubt he also used 
his dinner and supper guests as sounding boards, trying out new ideas, 
approaching these ideas in a succession of different ways, tinkering with 
them before an uncritical audience, and thus perfecting them. Once he 
had come to a decision, he relapsed again into his idleness. 



IO 



Our Empire Style 



I WENT TO HITLER'S EVENINGS ONCE OR TWICE A WEEK. AROUND MIDNIGHT, 

after the last movie had been run, he sometimes asked to see my roll of 
drawings and studied every detail until two or three o'clock in the 
morning. The other guests withdrew for a glass of wine, or went home, 
aware that there would be little chance to have a word with Hitler once 
he was caught up in his ruling passion. 

Hitler's favorite project was our model city, which was set up 
in the former exhibition rooms of the Berlin Academy of Arts. In order 
to reach it undisturbed, he had doors installed in the walls between the 
Chancellery and our building and a communicating path laid out. Some- 
times he invited the supper guests to our studio. We would set out 
armed with flashlights and keys. In the empty halls spotlights illuminated 
the models. There was no need for me to do the talking, for Hitler, 
with flashing eyes, explained every single detail to his companions. 

There was keen excitement when a new model was set up and 
illuminated by brilliant spots from the direction in which the sun would 
fall on the actual buildings. Most of these models were made on a scale 
of 1:50; cabinetmakers reproduced every small detail, and the wood 
was painted to simulate the materials that would actually be used. In 
this way whole sections of the grand new avenue were gradually put 
together, and we could have a three-dimensional impression of the 
building intended to be a reality in a decade. This model street went on for 

( 13^ ) 



133 ) Our Empire Style 

about a hundred feet through the former exhibition rooms of the 
Academy of Arts. 

Hitler was particularly excited over a large model of the grand 
boulevard on a scale of 1 : 1000. He loved to "enter his avenue" at various 
points and take measure of the future effect. For example, he assumed 
the point of view of a traveler emerging from the south station or admired 
the great hall as it looked from the heart of the avenue. To do so, he 
bent down, almost kneeling, his eye an inch or so above the level of the 
model, in order to have the right perspective, and while looking he 
spoke with unusual vivacity. These were the rare times when he re- 
linquished his usual stiffness. In no other situation did I see him so 
lively, so spontaneous, so relaxed, whereas I myself, often tired and even 
after years never free of a trace of respectful constraint, usually remained 
taciturn. One of my close associates summed up the character of this 
remarkable relationship: "Do you know what you are? You are Hitlers 
unrequited lovel" 

These rooms were kept under careful guard and no one was allowed 
to inspect the grand plan for the rebuilding of Berlin without Hitler s 
express permission. Once, when Goering had examined the model of the 
grand boulevard, he had his escort walk on ahead, then said in a deeply 
moved tone: "A few days ago the Fuehrer spoke to me about my mission 
after his death. He leaves me free to handle everything as I think best. 
But he made me promise one thing, that I would never replace you by 
anyone else after his death; that I would not tamper with your plans, 
but let you take complete charge. And that I must place the money for the 
buildings at your disposal, all the money you ask for." Goering made an 
emotional pause. "I solemnly took the Fuehrer's hand and promised him 
that, and I now make the same promise to you." Whereupon, he gave me a 
long and sentimental handshake. 

My father, too, came to see the work of his now famous son. He 
only shrugged his shoulders at the array of models: "You've all gone 
completely crazy." The evening of his visit we went to the theater and 
saw a comedy in which Heinz Riihmann was appearing. By chance Hitler 
was at the same performance. During the intermission he sent one of 
his adjutants to ask whether the old gentleman sitting beside me was my 
father; then he asked us both to his box. When my father— still erect 
and self-controlled in spite of his seventy-five years— was introduced 
to Hitler, he was overcome by a violent quivering such as I had never 
seen him exhibit before, nor ever did again. He turned pale, did not 
respond to Hitler's lavish praise of his son, and then took his leave 
in silence. Later, my father never mentioned this meeting, and I too 
avoided asking him about the fit of nerves that the sight of Hitler had 
produced in him. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 134 

"You ve all gone completely crazy." Nowadays, when I leaf through 
the numerous photos of models of our one-time grand boulevard, I see 
that it would have turned out not only crazy, but also boring. 

We had, of course, recognized that lining the new avenue solely 
with public buildings would lead to a certain lifelessness and had there- 
fore reserved two-thirds of the length of the street for private buildings. 
With Hitler's support we fended off efforts by various government 
agencies to displace these business buildings. We had no wish for an 
avenue consisting solely of ministries. A luxurious movie house for 
premieres, another cinema for the masses accommodating two thousand 
persons, a new opera house, three theaters, a new concert hall, a building 
for congresses, the so-called House of the Nations, a hotel of twenty- 
one stories, variety theaters, mass and luxury restaurants, and even an 
indoor swimming pool, built in Roman style and as large as the baths 
of Imperial Rome, were deliberately included in the plans with the idea 
of bringing urban life into the new avenue. 1 There were to be quiet 
interior courtyards with colonnades and small luxury shops set apart 
from the noise of the street and inviting strollers. Electric signs were to be 
employed profusely. The whole avenue was also conceived by Hitler 
and me as a continuous sales display of German goods which would 
exert a special attraction upon foreigners. 

Whenever, nowadays, I look through the plans and the photos of the 
models, even these varied parts of the avenue strike me as lifeless and 
regimented. When on the morning after my release from imprisonment 
I passed one of these buildings on the way to the airport, 2 I saw in a few 
seconds what I had been blind to for years: our plan completely lacked 
a sense of proportion. We had set aside block units of between five 
hundred feet and six hundred and sixty feet even for private businesses. 
A uniform height had been imposed on all the buildings, as well as on 
all the store fronts. Skyscrapers, however, were banished from the fore- 
ground. Thus we deprived ourselves of all the contrasts essential for 
animating and loosening the pattern. The entire conception was stamped 
by a monumental rigidity that would have counteracted all our efforts to 
introduce urban life into this avenue. 

Our happiest concept, comparatively speaking, was the central 
railroad station, the southern pole of Hitler's grand boulevard. The 
station, its steel ribbing showing through sheathings of copper and 
glass, would have handsomely offset the great blocks of stone dominating 
the rest of the avenue. It provided for four traffic levels linked by 
escalators and elevators and was to surpass New York's Grand Central 
Station in size. 

State visitors would have descended a large outside staircase. The 
idea was that as soon as they, as well as ordinary travelers, stepped 
out of the station they would be overwhelmed, or rather stunned, by the 



x 35 ) Our Empire Style 

urban scene and thus the power of the Reich. The station plaza, thirty- 
three hundred feet long and a thousand feet wide, was to be lined 
with captured weapons, after the fashion of the Avenue of Rams which 
leads from Karnak to Luxor. Hitler conceived this detail after the cam- 
paign in France and came back to it again in the late autumn of 1941, 
after his first defeats in the Soviet Union. 

This plaza was to be crowned by Hitlers great arch or "Arch of 
Triumph," as he only occasionally called it. Napoleon s Arc de Triomphe 
on the Place de l'Etoil e with its one-hundred-sixty-foot height certainly 
presents a monumental appearance and provides a majestic terminus 
to the Champs Elysees. Our triumphal arch, five hundred and fifty feet 
wide, three hundred and ninety-two feet deep, and three hundred and 
eighty-six feet high, would have towered over all the other buildings on 
this southern portion of the avenue and would literally have dwarfed 
them. 

After trying a few times in vain, I no longer had the courage to 
urge any changes on Hitler. This was the heart of his plan; he had 
conceived it long before encountering the purifying influence of Pro- 
fessor Troost, and the arch was the classic example of the architectural 
fantasies he had worked out in his lost sketchbook of the twenties. He 
remained impervious to all my hints that the monument might be im- 
proved by a change of proportions or a simplification of lines and did 
not demur when on the plans I delicately indicated the architect by three 
Xs. Everyone would know who the "anonymous" architect was. 

Sighting through the two hundred sixty foot opening of the great 
arch, the arriving traveler would see at the end of a three-mile vista 
the street's second great triumphal structure rearing out of the haze of the 
metropolis: the great hall with its enormous dome, described in an 
earlier chapter. 

Eleven separate ministry buildings adorned the avenue between the 
triumphal arch and the great hall. I had already designed quarters for 
the ministries of the Interior, Transportation, Justice, Economics, and 
Food when, after 1941, I was told to include a Colonial Ministry in my 
plans. 3 In other words, even after the invasion of Russia, Hitler was 
dreaming of acquiring German colonies. The ministers, who hoped that 
our program would result in concentration of their offices, now dis- 
tributed throughout Berlin, were disappointed. For by Hitler's decree 
the new buildings were to serve chiefly for purposes of prestige, not for 
the housing of the bureaucratic apparatus. 

After the monumental central section, the avenue once more resumed 
its business and entertainment character for a distance of more than half 
a mile and ended with the round plaza at the intersection with Potsdamer 
Strasse. Proceeding northward it once more began to be ceremonial. On 
the right rose Soldiers' Hall, designed by Wilhelm Kreis: a huge cube 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 136 

whose purpose Hitler had never stated frankly, but was probably to be 
a combination of armory and veterans' memorial. At any rate, after the 
armistice with France he gave orders that the dining car in which the 
surrender of Germany had been signed in 1918 and the surrender of 
France in 1940 was to be brought here as the hall's first exhibit. A 
crypt was planned for the tombs of celebrated German field marshals of 
the past, present, and future. 4 Stretching westward behind the hall as 
far as Bendlerstrasse were to be the buildings for a new High Command 
of the Army. 5 

After inspecting these plans Goering felt that his Air Ministry had 
been demoted. He asked me to be his architect,* and opposite the 
soldiers' hall, on the edge of the Tiergarten, we found an ideal building 
site for his purposes. Goering was enraptured by my plans for his new 
building (which after 1940 went by the name of Office of the Reich 
Marshal, in order to do justice to the multitude of positions he held), but 
Hitler was less so. "The building is too big for Goering," he commented. 
"He's puffing himself up too much. All in all, I don't like his taking my 
architect for that purpose." Although he privately grumbled a good deal 
over Goering's plans, he never found the courage to speak out on the 
matter. Goering knew Hitler and reassured me: "Just let the matter be 
and don't worry about it. We'll build it that way, and in the end the 
Fuehrer will be delighted." 

Hitler often showed similar forbearance in personal matters. Thus 
he overlooked the marital misdemeanors of his entourage— unless, as in 
the Blomberg case, 6 the scandal could be made to serve a political pur- 
pose. He could also smile at someone's craving for pomp and make acid 
remarks in private without so much as hinting to the person concerned 
that he disapproved of his conduct. 

The design for Goering's headquarters provided for extensive series 
of stairways, halls, and salons which took up more room than the offices 
themselves. The heart of the building was to be an imposing hall with 
a great flight of stairs rising through four stories, which would never 
have been used since everyone would of course have taken the elevator. 
The whole thing was pure spectacle. This was a decisive step in my per- 
sonal development from the neoclassicism I had first espoused, and which 
was perhaps still to be seen in the new Chancellery, to a blatant nouveau 
riche architecture of prestige. An entry for May 5, 1941, in my office 
journal records that the Reich Marshal was highly pleased with the model 
of his building. The staircase especially delighted him. Here he would 
stand, he declared, when he proclaimed the watchword of the year for the 
officers of the air force. The office journal preserves more of his magnil- 

* Despite my official position as General Inspector of Buildings, Hitler allowed 
me to design major buildings as a private architect. The general procedure for the 
reconstruction of Berlin was to call in private architects to design the official build- 
ings as well as the commercial buildings. 



137 ) Our Empire Style 

oquence. "In tribute to this, the greatest staircase in the world," Goering 
continued, "Breker must create a monument to the Inspector General of 
Buildings. It will be installed here to commemorate forever the man who 
so magnificently shaped this building." 

This part of the ministry, with its eight hundred feet of frontage 
on the grand boulevard, was supplemented by a wing of equal size, on 
the Tiergarten side, which contained the ballrooms Goering had stipulated 
as well as his private apartment. I situated the bedrooms on the top story. 
Alleging the need for air-raid protection, I decided to cover the roof with 
thirteen feet of garden soil, which meant that even large trees would 
have been able to strike root there. Thus I envisioned a two and a half 
acre roof garden, with swimming pools and tennis courts, fountains, 
ponds, colonnades, pergolas, and refreshment rooms, and finally a sum- 
mer theater for two hundred and forty spectators above the roofs of 
Berlin. Goering was overwhelmed and began raving about the parties 
he would hold there. "I'll illuminate the great dome with Bengal lights 
and provide grand fireworks for my guests." 

Without the basements, Goering's building would have had a volume 
of seven hundred and fifty-four thousand cubic yards; the volume of 
Hitler s newly built Chancellery was only five hundred and twenty 
thousand cubic yards. Nevertheless, Hitler did not feel that Goering had 
outstripped him. In that speech of August 1, 1938, in which he disclosed 
so many of his theories on architecture, Hitler let it be known that accord- 
ing to the great plan for the rebuilding of Berlin the newly completed 
Chancellery would be used for ten or twelve years. The plan, he said, 
provided for a residence and seat of government many times larger. 
After an inspection of Hess's party headquarters in Berlin, Hitler had 
abruptly decided on the final destiny of the Voss Strasse Chancellery. At 
Hess's headquarters Hitler was unpleasantly impressed by a stairwell 
painted a fiery red and furnishings that were considerably plainer and 
more austere than the ocean-liner style he and the other party and 
government leaders inclined toward. Back at the Chancellery, Hitler 
criticized his deputy's taste in no uncertain terms: "Hess is totally un- 
artistic. I must never let him build anything new. After a while he'll 
receive the present Chancellery as his headquarters, and he won't be 
allowed to make the slightest changes in it, because he's completely 
ignorant on such matters." This kind of criticism, especially of a man's 
aesthetic judgment, could sometimes spell an end to a career, and in the 
case of Rudolf Hess it was generally so taken. But Hitler never said a 
word of this to Hess. Hess could only observe that his standing must have 
fallen by the courtiers' reserved attitude toward him thereafter. 

There was to be a huge railroad station to the north as well as 
to the south of the city. Emerging from it, the visitor would face a 
basin of water thirty-three hundred feet long and eleven hundred and 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 138 

fifty-five feet wide, across which the great dome was to be seen a mile 
away. We did not intend to take our water from the Spree, polluted as it 
was by the filth of the city. As a lover of water sports, I wanted this 
artificial lake to be clean enough for swimming. Dressing cabins, boat- 
houses, and refreshment terraces were to line this vast open-air pool in the 
heart of the city; presumably it would have presented a remarkable con- 
trast to the massive buildings that were to be reflected in the lake. The 
reason for my lake was very simple: The marshy subsoil made the land 
unfit for building purposes. 

Three enormous buildings were to stand on the western side of the 
lake. In the middle would be the new Berlin Town Hall, some fifteen 
hundred feet in length. Hitler and I favored different designs; after many 
discussions my arguments prevailed, even against Hitler's persistent op- 
position. The Town Hall was flanked by the new High Command of the 
Navy and the new Berlin Police Headquarters. On the eastern side of 
the lake, in the midst of gardened areas, a new German War Academy 
was to be built. The plans for all these buildings were completed. 

This avenue between the two central railroad stations was meant 
to spell out in architecture the political, military, and economic power 
of Germany. In the center sat the absolute ruler of the Reich, and in his 
immediate proximity, as the highest expression of his power, was the 
great domed hall which was to be the dominant structure of the future 
Berlin. At least the planning would reflect Hitler's statement: "Berlin 
must change its face in order to adapt to its great new mission." 7 

For five years I lived in this world of plans, and in spite of all 
their defects and absurdities I still cannot entirely tear myself away 
from it all. When I look deep into myself for the reasons for my present 
hatred of Hitler, I sometimes think that in addition to all the terrible 
things he perpetrated I should perhaps include the personal disappoint- 
ment his warmaking brought to me; but I also realize that these plans 
could only have sprung from his unscrupulous game of power. 

Designs of such scale naturally indicate a kind of chronic megalo- 
mania, which is reason enough to dwell on these grandiose plans. Yet 
that broad boulevard, those new central railroad stations with their 
underground communications, are not so excessive by present-day 
standards when skyscrapers and public buildings all over the world 
have reached similar proportions. Perhaps it was less their size than the 
way they violated the human scale that made them abnormal. The great 
domed hall, Hitler s future Chancellery, Goering's grandiose ministry, the 
Soldiers' Hall, and the triumphal arch— I saw all these buildings with 
Hitlers political eyes. Once, when we were contemplating the model 
city, he took my arm and with moist eyes confided: "Now do you under- 
stand why we are building all this on such a scale? The capital of the 
Germanic Empire— if only my health were good. . . ." 



139 ) Our Empire Style 

Hitler was in a hurry for work to start on the five-mile-long core 
of his plan. After involved calculations I promised him that all the 
buildings would be completed by 1950. This was the spring of 1939. 
I had imagined that in setting such an early date, based as it was on a 
nonstop work program, I would give him special pleasure, so I was 
somewhat dashed when he merely accepted this deadline. Perhaps he was 
thinking about his military plans, which of course made a mockery of my 
calculations. 

At other times, however, he was so intent upon finishing within 
the intended period and seemed to be looking forward to 1950 with such 
eagerness, that if his architectural fantasies were only meant to conceal 
his imperialistic aims they would have been the best of all his deceits. 
His frequent allusions to the political importance of this project should 
have alerted me to the real nature of his plans; but the way he seemed 
to assume that my building operations in Berlin would go forward 
undisturbed offset these suspicions. I was accustomed to his occasionally 
saying things that sounded hallucinatory; in retrospect it is easier to find 
the thread between this trancelike state and the building projects. 

Hitler was extremely concerned that our designs should not be 
publicized. Only parts were made known, since we could not work en- 
tirely in secret; too many persons were engaged on preliminary jobs. 
Thus we occasionally permitted glimpses of aspects of the plan that 
seemed innocuous, and Hitler even let me publish an article outlining the 
basic idea of our urban renewal. 8 But when the cabaret humorist Werner 
Fink made fun of these projects he was sent off to a concentration camp, 
although this may not have been his only sin. His arrest took place, 
incidentally, just the day before I meant to attend his show as proof 
that I was not offended. 

Our caution extended even to details. When we were considering 
tearing down the tower of the Berlin Town Hall, we launched a trial 
balloon by having State Secretary Karl Hanke insert a "reader's letter" 
in a Berlin newspaper. When angry protests from the populace poured 
in, I postponed the matter. Our aim in general was to spare the feelings 
of the public in carrying out our plans. Thus we considered, for example, 
what to do about charming Monbijou Palace, since a museum was planned 
for the site. We decided to reconstruct it in the park of Charlottenburg 
Palace. 9 Even the radio tower was to be preserved for similar reasons. 
The Victory Column, while it would break the line of our projected 
avenue, was also not to be razed. Hitler regarded it as a monument of 
German history. In fact, he was going to make the column more impres- 
sive by adding a tambour to increase its height. He drew a sketch of the 
improvement; the drawing has been preserved. In discussing the matter 
he made fun of the thrift practiced by the State of Prussia even at the 
height of its triumph, pinching pennies by saving on the height of its 
column. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 140 

I estimated the total cost of the Berlin rebuilding at between four 
and six billion Reichsmark, which at present-day building costs would 
have been between 16 and 24 billion Deutsche Mark (DM). Spread over 
eleven years, this meant about five hundred million Reichsmark to be 
allocated annually to the project. This was by no means a Utopian pro- 
posal, for it amounted to only one twenty-fifth of the total volume of the 
German construction industry.* To further reassure myself, I proposed 
another comparison, though a highly dubious one. I calculated what per- 
centage of the total tax revenues of the Prussian state the notably thrifty 
King Frederick William I of Prussia, the father of Frederick the Great, 
had expended on his buildings in Berlin. It was many times our projected 
expenditures, which amounted to only 3 per cent of the 15 billion, 700 
million Reichsmark tax revenues. But the parallel was questionable be- 
cause the revenues of the early eighteenth century cannot be compared 
with the taxation of the present day. 

Professor Hettlage, my budgetary adviser, commented sardonically 
about our approach to the matter: "For the municipality of Berlin ex- 
penditures have to be governed by income; for us it is the other way 
around." 10 As Hitler and I saw it, our annual 500 million should not be 
represented as a single appropriation. Rather, it was to be divided among 
as many budgets as possible. Every ministry and every government office 
was to pay for its new quarters out of its individual budget, just as the 
government railroad system would pay for the modernization of its Berlin 
installations, and the city of Berlin for streets and subways. Private in- 
dustry would of course cover its own costs. 

By 1938 we had settled these details, and Hitler took some glee in 
the cunning of it all: "Distributed this way," he commented, "the cost 
of the whole thing wont attract attention. All that we'll finance ourselves 
will be the great hall and the triumphal arch. We'll call on the people 
to make contributions. In addition the Finance Minister is to place 60 
million annually at the disposal of your office. Whatever we don't use of 
this can be put aside for the future." By 1941 I had already accumulated 
218 million marks. 11 In 1943— the sum had meanwhile increased to three 
hundred twenty million— the Finance Minister proposed, and I agreed, 
that the account be quietly dissolved. We never said a word to Hitler 
about this. 

Finance Minister von Schwerin-Krosigk, aghast at this squandering 
of public funds, repeatedly made objections. Lest these disturb me, 
Hitler fetched up counter arguments: 

If the Finance Minister could realize what a source of income to the 
state my buildings will be in fifty years! Remember what happened with 

* According to Rolf Wagenfiihr, Die deutsche Industrie im Kriege 1939-1945 
(Berlin, 1954), 12.8 billion Reichsmarks were spent on building projects in 1939. 



141 ) Our Empire Style 

Ludwig II. Everyone said he was mad because of the cost of his palaces. 
But today? Most tourists go to Upper Bavaria solely to see them. The en- 
trance fees alone have long since paid for the building costs. Don't you 
agree? The whole world will come to Berlin to see our buildings. All we 
need do is tell the Americans how much the Great Hall cost. Maybe well 
exaggerate a bit and say a billion and a half instead of a billion. Then 
they'll be wild to see the most expensive building in the world. 

Each time he sat over the plans he was apt to repeat: "My only 
wish, Speer, is to live to see these buildings. In 1950 we'll organize a 
world's fair. Until then the buildings will remain empty, and then they'll 
serve as exhibition buildings. We'll invite the entire world." That was the 
way Hitler talked; it was difficult to guess his real thoughts. To console 
my wife, who saw the next eleven years devoted entirely to work with no 
prospect of any family life, I promised her a trip around the world in 1950. 

Hitler's idea of distributing the cost of the project over as many 
shoulders as possible actually worked out. For Berlin, wealthy, prospering 
and increasingly the center of national authority, attracted more and more 
government officials. Industries responded to this by making impressive 
additions to their Berlin headquarters. So far there had been only one 
avenue which functioned as "Berlin's show window": Unter den Linden. 
Big companies were lured to the broad new boulevard partly in the 
expectation of avoiding the traffic jams of the old prestige streets, partly 
because building lots were relatively cheap in this still undeveloped area. 
At the outset of my work I received many applications for building proj- 
ects which would otherwise have been scattered at random throughout 
the city. Thus, soon after Hitler's accession to power the large new 
building of the Reichsbank had been put up in an out-of-the-way quarter; 
several blocks had been torn down to make room for it. Incidentally, one 
day after dinner Himmler pointed out that the longitudinal and trans- 
verse wings had the shape of a Christian cross. This, he maintained, was 
obviously a veiled attempt on the part of the Catholic architect Wolf 
to glorify the Christian religion. Hitler knew enough about building to be 
merely amused by such points. 

Within a few months after the plans were finally drafted and even 
before the shifting of the railroad tracks had been completed, the first 
available section of the avenue, three quarters of a mile long, was as- 
signed to the various builders. Applications from ministries, private com- 
panies, and government departments for some of the other building sites, 
which would not be available for several years, increased to such an extent 
that all the sites along the entire four and a half miles were taken. What is 
more, we had to begin allocating sites south of the south station. With 
some difficulty we restrained Dr. Robert Ley, head of the German Labor 
Front, from using the enormous funds he collected from workmen's 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 142 

contributions to buy up a fifth of the entire length of the boulevard for 
his own purposes. Even so, he obtained a block a thousand feet in length, 
which he planned to make into a huge amusement area. 

Among the motives for this burst of building fever was, of course, 
the desire to curry favor with Hitler by erecting important edifices. Since 
the expenses for such buildings were higher than they would have been 
on ordinary sites, I suggested to Hitler that he commend the people who 
commissioned the buildings for all the additional millions they were 
spending. The idea appealed to him immediately. "Why not have a medal 
for those who have rendered service to art? We'll award it very rarely 
and chiefly to those who have financed a major building. A lot can be 
done with medals." Even the British Ambassador thought (and he was not 
wrong) that he was ingratiating himself with Hitler when he proposed 
building a new embassy within the framework of the Berlin renewal 
plan. Mussolini, too, was extremely interested in the project.* 

Although Hitler did not reveal the full extent of his ambitions in the 
realm of architecture, there was plenty of discussion about what he did 
make public. As a result, there was a boom in architecture. Had Hitler 
been interested in breeding horses, a passion for horse breeding would 
undoubtedly have sprung up among the leading men in the Reich. As it 
was, there was a veritable flood of designs with a Hitlerian cast. True, no 
such thing as a style of the Third Reich developed, but buildings took 
a definite cast, marked by certain eclectic elements. Soon this mode be- 
came almost universal. Yet Hitler was by no means doctrinaire. He realized 
full well that an autobahn restaurant or a Hitler Youth home in the 
country should not look like an urban building. Nor would it ever have 
occurred to him to build a factory in his public-display style; in fact, he 
could become enthusiastic over an industrial building in glass and steel. 
But any public building in a nation that was on the point of creating 
an empire must, he thought, have a particular stamp. 

The plans for Berlin inspired a host of designs for other urban 
programs. Every Gauleiter henceforth wanted to immortalize himself in 

* Sir Neville Henderson in Failure of a Mission (New York, 1940), p. 48, wrote: 

My idea, therefore, was to exchange the Embassy, which the German Gov- 
ernment would have been glad to use for government offices, for some large site 
on a corner of one of Hitler's new thoroughfares. ... I spoke both to Goering 
and Ribbentrop of this plan and asked them to let Hitler know that I contem- 
plated it. I suggested that they might inform him and that I meant one day to 
talk to him about it and hoped it would form part of a general understanding 
with Germany. 

According to the Office Journal, August 20, 1941, Alfieri mentioned that "the 
Duce takes an extraordinary interest in German architecture and has already asked 
him if he knows Speer." 



143 ) Our Empire Style 

his own city. Almost every one of the plans provided, as did my Berlin 
design, for intersecting axes; they imitated my design even to the orienta- 
tion. The Berlin model had become a rigid pattern. 

In conferring with me over plans, Hitler perpetually drew sketches 
of his own. They were casually tossed off but accurate in perspective; he 
drew outlines, cross sections, and renderings to scale. An architect could 
not have done better. Some mornings he would show me a well-executed 
sketch he had prepared overnight, but most of his drawings were done 
in a few hasty strokes during our discussions. 

I kept these quick sketches of Hitler's, noting their dates and sub- 
jects, and have preserved them to this day. It is interesting that of a 
total of one hundred and twenty-five such drawings, a good fourth of 
them relate to the Linz building project, which was always closest to his 
heart. Equally frequent are sketches for theaters. One morning he sur- 
prised me with a neatly drawn design for a commemorative shaft for 
Munich, which was to be a new symbol of the city dwarfing the towers of 
the Frauenkirche. He regarded this project, like the Berlin triumphal arch, 
as his very own, and did not hesitate to make revisions, based on his own 
sketch, in the design of a Munich architect. Even today these changes 
strike me as real improvements, providing better for the transition be- 
tween the static elements of the base and the dynamic thrust of the 
column. 

Hermann Giessler, whom Hitler commissioned to draw up the plans 
for Munich, could do marvelous imitations of Dr. Ley, the stammering 
Labor Front leader. Hitler was so delighted with this sort of comedy that 
he would ask Giessler again and again to tell the story of a visit by the 
Leys to the showrooms where the models for the Munich city plan were 
on exhibition. First, Giessler described how the leader of the German 
workers appeared at the studio in an elegant summer suit, with white 
stitched gloves and straw hat, accompanied by his wife, who was dressed 
with equal ostentation. Giessler showed him the Munich plan until Ley 
interrupted: 'Til build on this entire block. What will that cost? A few 
hundred millions? Yes, we want to build solidly. . . ." 

"And what will be the purpose of the building?" 

"A large fashion house. We'll set all the fashions. My wife will take 
care of that end. We need a whole building for it. Let's! My wife and 
I will set the German fashions. . . . And . . . and . . . and we'll need whores 
too! Lots of them, a whole house full, with the most modern furnishings. 
We'll take everything in hand; a few hundred millions for the building, 
that's nothing." Hitler laughed until the tears came over the depraved 
notions of his 'labor leader." Giessler, who had had to act out this scene 
innumerable times, was sick to death of it. 

My own building plans were not the only ones Hitler was ener- 
getically promoting. He was constantly approving forums for provincial 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 144 

capitals and urging his corps of leaders to officiate as patrons of public 
edifices. He liked to see a good deal of ruthless competition, since he 
assumed that this was the only road to outstanding achievement. This 
attitude of his often irritated me. He could not understand that there 
were limits to what we could do. Thus, he passed over my objection that 
before long it would be impossible for me to keep any deadlines because 
his Gauleiters were using up the available quarry materials for their 
own buildings. 

Himmler came to Hitlers aid. When he heard of the threatening 
shortage of brick and granite, he offered to employ his prisoners to 
increase production. He proposed to Hitler that an extensive brickworks 
be set up in Sachsenhausen, near Berlin, under SS direction and as SS 
property. Since Himmler was extremely receptive to innovations, some- 
one soon turned up with a new system for manufacturing brick. But 
the promised production did not follow, for the technique proved a 
failure. 

Another promise made by Himmler, who was constantly pursuing 
futuristic projects, ended similarly. He offered to supply granite blocks 
for the buildings in Nuremberg and Berlin using the labor of concentra- 
tion camp prisoners. He immediately started a firm with a noncommital 
name and set the prisoners to breaking stone. Because of the incredible 
ignorance of the SS entrepreneurs, the blocks developed cracks, and the 
SS was finally forced to admit that it could supply only a small part of 
the promised granite. Dr. Todt's road-building organization took the rest 
of the material produced and used it for cobblestones. Hitler, who had 
placed great hopes in Himmlers promises, was more and more annoyed. 
Finally, he commented sarcastically that the SS had better devote itself 
to making felt slippers and paper bags, the traditional prison products. 

Out of the multitude of projects, I myself was to design the square 
in front of the great hall, at Hitler's request. In addition I had taken 
over Goering^ new building and the south station. That was more than 
enough, for I was also to design the Nuremberg Party Rally buildings. 
But since these various projects were to be carried out over a decade I 
was able to manage if I turned the technical details over to others, with 
a studio of eight to ten associates. It was still possible for me to keep 
personal control of a group that size. My private office was on Lindenallee 
in the West End, near Adolf Hitler Platz, which had formerly been Reichs- 
kanzler Platz. But my afternoons, until the late hours of the evening, were 
regularly reserved for my city-planning office in Pariser Platz. Here I 
assigned major commissions to those men I considered Germany's best 
architects. Paul Bonatz, after many designs for bridges, was given his 
first high-rise commission: the High Command of the Navy. Hitler was 
especially pleased with the grand scale of the design. German Bestelmeyer 



145 ) Our Empire Style 

was assigned the new Town Hall, Wilhelm Kreis the High Command of 
the Army, the Soldiers' Hall, and various museums. Peter Behrens, the 
teacher of Walter Gropius and Mies van der Rohe, who had long worked 
for the AEG electrical company, was entrusted with building the firm's 
new administrative building on the grand boulevard. This naturally called 
forth objections from Rosenberg and his cultural watch-and-ward society; 
they were outraged that this forerunner of architectural radicalism should 
be allowed to win immortality on "the Fuehrer's avenue." Hitler, who 
thought well of Peter Behrens's embassy in Leningrad (built when the 
city was still St. Petersburg), backed up my decision. Several times 
I also pressed my teacher, Tessenow, to take part in the design competi- 
tions. But he did not want to abandon his simple small-town craftsman's 
style and stubbornly resisted the temptation to design big buildings. 

For sculpture I employed chiefly Josef Thorak and Arno Breker, the 
pupil of Maillol. In 1943, Breker acted as my intermediary in commission- 
ing a sculpture by Maillol to be set up in Grunewald. 

Historians have commented that in my private associations I kept 
away from the party.* It might also be said that the party bigwigs kept 
away from me, whom they regarded as an interloper. But I was not 
especially interested in what the Reichsleiters and Gauleiters felt, since I 
had Hitler's confidence. Aside from Karl Hanke, who had "discovered" 
me, I was not on familiar terms with any of them. None of them visited 
me at home. Instead, I found my circle of friends among the artists 
I gave employment to and among their friends. What time I had in Ber- 
lin for socializing I spent with Arno Breker and Wilhelm Kreis; we also 
frequently saw Wilhelm Kempff , the pianist. In Munich I was on friendly 
terms with Josef Thorak and Hermann Kaspar, the painter. Late in the 
night Kaspar could seldom be restrained from loudly proclaiming his 
preference for the Bavarian monarchy. 

I was also close to my first client, Dr. Robert Frank, for whom 
I had rebuilt a manor house back in 1933, before I became involved wi^h 
the buildings for Hitler and Goebbels. It was situated near Wilsnack 
some eighty miles from Berlin, and I frequently spent weekends there 
with my family. Until 1933, Frank had been general manager of the 
Prussian Electricity Works, but after the Nazis took power he was relieved 
of his post and had since lived in retirement. Occasionally bothered by 
the party, he was protected by my friendship. In 1945, I entrusted my 
family to him; there, in Schleswig, they were as far as possible from the 
center of the collapse. 

Shortly after my appointment I managed to persuade Hitler that 
party members of any quality had long since been assigned leading posts, 
so that only members of the second rank were available for my tasks. 

* For example, Trevor-Roper, Fest, and Bullock. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 146 

He therefore gave me permission to choose my associates as I pleased. 
Gradually word went round that a sanctuary for nonparty people could 
be found in my office, and so more and more architects thronged to join us. 

Once one of my associates asked me for a reference for admission to 
the party. My answer went the rounds of the Inspectorate General of 
Building: "Why? It's enough for all of us that I'm in the party." We took 
Hitlers building plans seriously but were not so reverential as others 
about the solemnity of this Hitlerian Reich. 

I also continued to absent myself from party meetings, had scarcely 
any contact with party circles even in the Berlin district, and neglected 
the party duties turned over to me, although I could have built them 
up into positions of power. If only from sheer lack of time, I turned over 
the "Beauty of Work" office to a permanent deputy. I could plead my 
total incapacity for making public speeches as an excuse for this sort 
of lack of zeal. 

In March 1939, I took a trip with a group of close friends through 
Sicily and southern Italy. Wilhelm Kreis, Josef Thorak, Hermann Kaspar, 
Arno Breker, Robert Frank, Karl Brandt, and their wives, formed the par- 
ty. Magda Goebbels, the Propaganda Minister's wife, came along at our 
invitation; she used a false name for the journey. 

There were certainly a good many love affairs in Hitler's entourage, 
and he tolerated them. Thus Bormann, with a crudeness that might be 
expected from this unfeeling and amoral man, had his movie-actress 
mistress visit him at Obersalzberg and actually stay in his house in the 
midst of his family. Frau Bormann put up with this situation in a way 
I found incomprehensible. 

Goebbels, too, had many love affairs. Half amused, half revolted, 
his state secretary. JHanke. would tell how the all-powerful Minister of 
Culture would blackmail young movie actresses. But Goebbels's intimacy 
with the Czech film star Lida Baarova was more than an affair. At the 
time, his wife broke with him and demanded that he live separately 
from her and the children. Hanke and I were entirely on the wife's side, 
but Hanke himself complicated this marital crisis when he fell in love 
with his minister's wife, who was so many years his senior. In order 
to extricate her from this embarrassment, I proposed that she accompany 
us on the trip. Hanke wanted to follow her; during our travels he bom- 
barded her with love letters; but she was firm in her refusal. 

Throughout this trip, Frau Goebbels proved a pleasant and sensible 
woman. In general the wives of the regime's bigwigs resisted the tempta- 
tion of power far more than their husbands. They did not lose themselves 
in the latters' fantasy world. They looked on at the often grotesque antics 
of their husbands with inner reservations and were not caught up in 
the political whirlwind in which their men were carried steeply upward. 



147 ) Our Empire Style 

Frau Bormann remained a modest, somewhat browbeaten housewife, 
although blindly devoted both to her husband and the party ideology. 
I had the impression that Frau Goering was inclined to smile at her 
husband's mania for pomp. And in the final analysis Eva Braun, too, 
proved her inner superiority. At any rate she never used for personal ends 
the power which lay within her grasp. 

Sicily, with its Doric temple ruins in Segesta, Syracuse, Selinus, and 
Agrigentum, provided a valuable supplement to the impressions of our 
earlier journey to Greece. At the sight of the temples of Selinus and 
Agrigentum, I observed once again, and with some satisfaction, that even 
classical antiquity had not been free of megalomaniacal impulses. The 
Greeks of the colonies were obviously departing from the principle of 
moderation so praised in the motherland. Compared to these temples, all 
the examples of Saracen-Norman architecture we encountered paled, ex- 
cept for Frederick H' s wonderful hun ting castl e, the octagonal Castel del 
Monte. Paestum was another high pomt ofour trip; Pompeii, on the 
other hand, seemed to me further away from the pure forms of Paestum 
than were our buildings from the world of the Dorians. 

On the return journey we stayed in Rome for a few days. The 
Fascist government discovered the real identity of our illustrious traveling 
companion, and Italian Propaganda Minister Alfieri invited us all to the 
opera. But we found it hard to give a plausible explanation for the fact 
that the second lady of the German Reich was traveling abroad without 
her husband and therefore set out for home as quickly as possible. 

While we had been dreaming our way through Greek antiquity, 
Hitler occupied Czechoslovakia and annexed it to the Reich. Back in 
Germany we found a general mood of depression. Apprehensions about 
the future filled all of us. To this day I find it strange that a nation 
can have so right a sense of what is to come, so much so that all the 
massive propaganda by the government does not banish this feeling. 

Nevertheless, it seemed a better sign that Hitler stood up to Goebbels 

one day when, at lunch in the Chancellery, the Propaganda Minister 

attacked former Foreign Minister von Neurath, who a few weeks earlier 

had been appointed Reich Protector of Bohemia and Moravia. Goebbels 

said: "Everyone knows von Neurath is a weak sneak. But what is needed 

in the Protectorate is a strong hand to keep order. This man has nothing 

in common with us; he belongs to an entirely different world/' Hitler 

took issue with this. "Von Neurath was the only man for the job. In the 

Anglo-Saxon world he is considered a man of distinction. The international 

effect of his appointment will be reassuring because people will see in it 

my decision not to deprive the Czechs of their racial and national life." 

f Hitler asked me to report on my impressions of Italy. I had been 

f most struck by the fact that the walls of even the villages were painted 

y with militant propaganda slogans. "We dont need that," Hitler com- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 148 

mented. "If it comes to a war, the German people are tough enough. 
This kind of propaganda may be all right for Italy. Whether it does 
any good is another question."* 

Hitler had already asked me several times to deliver the opening 
address at the Munich Architectural Exhibition in his stead. Hitherto 
I had always been able to avoid such duties by a variety of pretexts. 
In February 1938 my evasions resulted in a kind of deal: I agreed to 
design the picture gallery and the stadium for Linz, if I did not have 
to make a speech. 

But now, on the eve of Hitlers fiftieth birthday, a part of the "East- 
West axis" in Berlin was to be opened to traffic, with Hitler present at 
the dedication. That maiden speech could no longer be fended off— 
and to make matters worse in the presence of the Chief of State. At dinner 
Hitler announced: "A great event: Speer is making a speech. I can hardly 
wait to hear what he will say." 

In the middle of the roadway, at the Brandenburg Gate, the digni- 
taries of the city had lined up, with me on the right wing and with 
the crowd massed behind ropes on the distant sidewalks. From the 
distance came cheers, swelling as Hitlers motorcade approached and 
becoming a steady roar. Hitler's car stopped right in front of me; he got 
out and greeted me by shaking hands, while responding to the welcome 
of the dignitaries merely by raising his arm briefly. Portable movie 
cameras began filming the scene from close up, while Hitler expectantly 
took up a position six feet away from me. I took a deep breath, then 
spoke these exact words: "Mein Ftihrer, I herewith report the completion 
of the East-West axis. May the work speak for itself!" There was a 
protracted pause before Hitler replied with a few sentences. Then I was 
invited into his car and drove with him down the five-mile lane of Ber- 
liners who were paying tribute to him on his fiftieth birthday. No doubt 
it had taken an energetic effort by the Propaganda Ministry to bring 
this crowd here; but the applause seemed to me genuine. 

After we had reached the Chancellery and were waiting to be called 
to dinner, Hitler commented good-humoredly: "You put me in a fine fix 
with your two sentences. I was expecting a long speech and meant to use 
the time while you were talking to frame my answer, the way I usually do. 
But since you were finished so quickly, I didn't know what to say. Still 
I must grant you that it was a good speech. One of the best I have ever 

* In his speech to the editors in chief of the German press Hitler described 
what he considered to be the proper method of propaganda for creating war readi- 
ness: "Certain events should be presented in such a light that unconsciously the 
masses will automatically come to the conclusion: If there's no way to redress this 
matter pleasantly then it will have to be done by force; we can't possibly let things 
go on this way." 



149 ) Our Empire Style 

heard." In the following years this anecdote became part of his regular 
repertory, and he told it often. 

At midnight the diners offered Hitler the proper congratulations. 
But when I told him that to celebrate the day I had set up a thirteen-foot 
model of his triumphal arch in one of the salons, he immediately left 
the party and hurried to the room. For a long time he stood contemplating 
with visible emotion the dream of his younger years, realized in this 
model. Overwhelmed, he gave me his hand without a word, and then, 
in a euphoric mood, lectured his birthday guests on the importance of 
this structure for the future history of the Reich. That night he returned 
to look at the model several times. On the way back and forth we would 
pass the former cabinet room where Bismarck had presided over the 
Congress of Berlin in 1878. Here Hitler's birthday presents were heaped 
up on long tables— pretty much a collection of kitsch sent by his Reichs- 
leiters and Gauleiters: white marble nudes, small bronze casts of such 
well-known works as the Roman boy extracting a thorn from his foot, 
and oil paintings whose level matched the stuff exhibited in the House 
of Art. Hitler spoke well of some of the presents, made fun of others, 
but there was in fact not much difference between them. 

Meanwhile matters had progressed between Hanke and Frau Goeb- 
bels to such a point that, to the horror of everyone in the know, they 
wished to marry. An ill-matched couple: Hanke was young and awkward, 
she was considerably older and a polished society woman. Hanke peti- 
tioned Hitler for his approval, but Hitler refused to allow the Goebbelses 
to divorce for raison d'etat! At the beginning of the 1939 Bayreuth Fes- 
tival, Hanke arrived at my house one morning in a state of despair. Magda 
and Joseph Goebbels had had a reconciliation, he reported, and gone 
to Bayreuth together. For my part I thought this was the happiest outcome 
for Hanke, too. But you cannot console a desperate lover with felicitations 
on his escape. I therefore promised him to find out what had happened 
in Bayreuth and left at once. 

The Wagner family had added a spacious wing to Haus Wahnfried, 
where Hitler and his adjutants stayed during the festival, while Hitler s 
guests were put up in private homes in Bayreuth. Incidentally, Hitler 
selected these guests more carefully than he did at Obersalzberg, or even 
at the Chancellery. Aside from the adjutants he invited only a few other 
persons with their wives, those he could be sure would be welcome 
to the Wagner family. Actually, these guests were almost always only 
Dr. Dietrich, Dr. Brandt, and myself. 

On these festival days Hitler seemed more relaxed than usual. He 
obviously felt at ease in the Wagner family and free of the compulsion 
to represent power, which he sometimes thought himself obliged to do 
even with the evening group in the Chancellery. He was gay, paternal 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 150 

to the children, friendly and solicitous toward Winifred Wagner. Without 
Hitler's financial aid, the festival could scarcely have been kept going. 
Every year Bormann produced hundreds of thousands of marks from 
his funds in order to make the festival productions the glory of the 
German opera season. As patron of the festival and as the friend of 
the Wagner family, Hitler was no doubt realizing a dream which even 
in his youth he perhaps never quite dared to dream. 

Goebbels and his wife had arrived in Bayreuth on the same day 
as myself and, like Hitler, had moved into the Wahnfried annex. Frau 
Goebbels looked very drawn. She spoke quite candidly with me: "It was 
frightful, the way my husband threatened me. I was just beginning 
to recuperate at Gastein when he turned up at the hotel. For three days 
he argued with me incessantly, until I could no longer stand it. He used 
the children to blackmail me; he threatened to take them away from me. 
What could I do? The reconciliation is only for show. Albert, it's terrible! 
I've had to swear never to meet Karl privately again. I'm so unhappy, 
but I have no choice." 

What could have been more appropriate for this marital tragedy 
than, of all operas, Tristan und Isolde? Hitler, Herr and Frau Goebbels, 
Frau Winifred Wagner, and I heard it sitting in the big central box. 
Frau Goebbels, on my right, cried silently throughout the performance. 
During the intermission she sat, bowed and sobbing uncontrollably, in 
a corner of the salon, while Hitler and Goebbels went to the window 
to show themselves to the audience, both of them strenuously pretending 
to be unaware of the embarrassing episode. 

Next morning I was able to explain to Hitler, who could not under- 
stand Frau Goebbels's conduct, the background of the so-called recon- 
ciliation. As Chief of State he welcomed this turn of events, but in my 
presence he sent for Goebbels at once and in a few dry words informed 
him that it would be better if he left Bayreuth immediately with his wife. 
Without allowing him to reply, or even shaking hands with him, he 
dismissed the Propaganda Minister and then turned to me: "With women 
Goebbels is a cynic." He too was one, though in a different way. 



II 

The Globe 



Whenever he came to see my models of the Berlin buildings, hitler 
would particularly brood over one part of the plan: the future head- 
quarters of the Reich which was meant to manifest for hundreds of years 
to come the power that had been attained in the era of Hitler. Just as the 
Champs Elysees finds its dramatic focus in the residence of the French 
kings, so the grand boulevard was to culminate in a group of buildings 
which Hitler regarded as central to his political activities. These were 
the Chancellery, where the affairs of government were conducted; the 
High Command of the Armed Forces, where the power of command over 
the three branches of the services was concentrated; and a secretariat 
for the party (Bormann), for protocol (Meissner), and for Hitlers per- 
sonal affairs (Bouhler). The Reichstag building also formed part of this 
complex, but this in no way signified that Hitler meant the German par- 
liament to play any important part in the exercise of power. It was mere 
chance that the old Reichstag building happened to be situated there. 
I proposed to Hitler that Paul Wallot's Reichstag, built in Wilhelmine 
Germany, be razed. But here I met unexpected resistance. Hitler liked the 
structure. However, he intended to use it merely for social purposes. 
Hitler was usually taciturn about his ultimate goals. When on this 
and some other occasions he spoke rather candidly to me about the back- 
ground of his building plans, he did so out of that intimacy that almost 
always crops up in the relationship between an architect and his client. 

(150 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 152 

Tn the old building we can set up reading rooms and lounges for the 
deputies. For all I care the chamber can be turned into a library. With 
its five hundred and eighty seats it's much too small for us. We'll build a 
new one right beside it. Provide a chamber for twelve hundred deputies!" 1 
That assumed a population of one hundred and forty million, and so 
in saying this Hitler was revealing the scale on which he was thinking. 
Partly he had in mind a rapid natural increase of the Germans, partly 
the incorporation into the Reich of other Germanic peoples— but he was 
not including the population of subjugated nations, for these would not 
have any voting rights. I proposed that he simply increase the number 
of voters whom each deputy represented, and thereby make the old 
Reichstag chamber still usable. But Hitler did not want to alter the 
proportion of sixty thousand voters for each deputy which had been 
set by the Weimar Republic. He never explained his reasons; but he was 
as firm on this matter as he was firm about nominal retention of the 
traditional electoral system with its fixed dates for elections, rules of 
franchise, ballot boxes, and secret ballot. On this matter he evidently 
wanted to preserve a tradition which had brought him to power, even 
though his introduction of the one-party system had made the whole 
thing pointless. 

The buildings which were intended to frame the future Adolf Hitler 
Platz lay in the shadow of the great domed hall. But as if Hitler wanted 
by architecture alone to denigrate the whole process of popular repre- 
sentation, the hall had a volume fifty times greater than the proposed 
Reichstag building. He had asked me to work out the designs for this hall 
as early as the summer of 1936. 2 On April 20, 1937, his birthday, I gave 
him the renderings, ground plans, cross sections, and a first model of the 
building. He was delighted and only quarreled with my having signed 
the plans: "Developed on the basis of the Fuehrer's ideas." I was the 
architect, he said, and my contribution to this building must be given 
greater credit than his sketch of the idea dating from 1925. I stuck to 
this formula, however, and Hitler was probably gratified at my refusal 
to claim authorship for this building. Partial models were prepared from 
the plans, and in 1939 a detailed wooden model of the exterior some ten 
feet high and another model of the interior were made. The floor could be 
removed in order to test the future effect at eye level. In the course of his 
many visits to the exhibit Hitler would unfailingly spend a long time con- 
templating these two models. He would point triumphantly to them as an 
idea that must have struck his friends fifteen years ago as a fantastic 
quirk. "In those days who was prepared to believe me when I said that 
this would be built some day!" 

This structure, the greatest assembly hall in the world ever conceived 
up to that time, consisted of one vast hall that could hold between one 
hundred fifty and one hundred eighty thousand persons standing. In spite 



153 ) The Globe 

of Hitler's negative attitude toward Himmler's and Rosenberg's mystical 
notions, the hall was essentially a place of worship. The idea was that over 
the course of centuries, by tradition and venerability, it would acquire an 
importance similar to that St. Peter's in Rome has for Catholic Christen- 
dom. Without some such essentially pseudoreligious background the ex- 
penditure for Hitler's central building would have been pointless and 
incomprehensible. 

The round interior was to have the almost inconceivable diameter 
of eight hundred and twenty-five feet. The huge dome was to begin its 
slightly parabolic curve at a height of three hundred and twenty-three 
feet and rise to a height of seven hundred and twenty-six feet. 

In a sense the Pantheon in Rome had served as our model. The 
Berlin dome was also to contain a round opening for light, but this 
opening alone would be one hundred and fifty-two feet in diameter, 
larger than the entire dome of the Pantheon (142 feet) and of St. Peter's 
(145 feet). The interior would contain sixteen times the volume of 
St. Peter's. 

The interior appointments were to be as simple as possible. Circling 
an area four hundred sixty-two feet in diameter, a three-tier gallery rose 
to a height of one hundred feet. A circle of one hundred rectangular 
marble pillars— still almost on a human scale, for they were only eighty 
feet high— was broken by a recess opposite the entrance. This recess was 
one hundred and sixty-five feet high and ninety-two feet wide, and was 
to be clad at the rear in gold mosaic. In front of it, on a marble pedestal 
forty-six feet in height, perched the hall's single sculptural feature: a 
gilded German eagle with a swastika in its claws. This symbol of sover- 
eignty might be said to be the very fountainhead of Hitler's grand 
boulevard. Beneath this symbol would be the podium for the Leader 
of the nation; from this spot he would deliver his messages to the peoples 
of his future empire. I tried to give this spot suitable emphasis, but here 
the fatal flaw of architecture that has lost all sense of proportion was 
revealed. Under that vast dome Hitler dwindled to an optical zero. 

From the outside the dome would have loomed against the sky like 
some green mountain, for it was to be roofed with patinated plates of 
copper. At its peak we planned a skylight turret one hundred and 
thirty-two feet high, of the lightest possible metal construction. The 
turret would be crowned by an eagle with a swastika. 

Optically, the mass of the dome was to have been set off by a series 
of pillars sixty-six feet high. I thought this effect would bring things 
back to scale— undoubtedly a vain hope. The mountainous dome rested 
upon a granite edifice two hundred and forty-four feet high with sides 
ten hundred and forty feet long. A delicate frieze, four clustered, fluted 
pillars on each of the four corners, and a colonnade along the front 
facing the square were to dramatize the size of the enormous cube. 8 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 154 

Two sculptures each fifty feet high would flank the colonnade. Hitler 
had already decided on the subjects of these sculptures when we were 
preparing our first sketches of the building. One would represent Atlas 
bearing the vault of the heavens, the other Tellus supporting the globe 
of the world. The spheres representing sky and earth were to be enamel 
coated with constellations and continents traced in gold. 

The volume of this structure amounted to almost 27.5 million cubic 
yards; 4 the Capitol in Washington would have been contained many times 
in such a mass. These were dimensions of an inflationary sort. 

Yet the hall was by no means an insane project which could in fact 
never be executed. Our plans did not belong to that supergrandiose 
category envisioned by Claude Nicolas Ledoux as the swan song of the 
Bourbon dynasty of France, or by Etienne L. Boullee to glorify the 
Revolution— projects which were never meant to be carried out. Their 
scale, however, was by no means vaster than Hitlers. 5 But we were 
seriously going ahead with our plans. As early as 1939 many old buildings 
in the vicinity of the Reichstag were razed to make room for our Great 
Hall and the other buildings that were to surround the future Adolf Hitler 
Platz. The character of the underlying soil was studied. Detail drawings 
were prepared and models built. Millions of marks were spent on granite 
for the exterior. Nor were the purchases confined to Germany. Despite 
the shortage of foreign exchange, Hitler had orders placed with quarries 
in southern Sweden and Finland. Like all the other edifices on Hitler's 
long grand boulevard, the great hall was also scheduled to be completed 
in eleven years, by 1950. Since the hall would take longer to build than 
all the rest, the ceremonial cornerstone laying was set for 1940. 

Technically, there was no special problem in constructing a dome 
over eight hundred feet in diameter.* The bridge builders of the thirties 
had no difficulty with similar spans of steel or reinforced concrete. Leading 
German engineers had even calculated that it would be possible to build 
a massive vault with such a span. In keeping with my notion of "ruin 
value" I would rather have eschewed the use of steel; but in this case 
Hitler expressed doubts. "You know, an aerial bomb might strike the dome 
and damage the vaulting. If there were danger of collapse, how would 
you go about making repairs?" He was right, and we therefore had a 
steel skeleton constructed, from which the inner shell of the dome would 
be suspended. The walls, however, were to be of solid stone like the 
Nuremberg buildings. Their weight, along with that of the dome, would 
exert tremendous pressure and would demand an unusually strong founda- 
tion. The engineers decided on an enormous concrete footing which would 
have had a content of 3.9 million cubic yards. According to our calcula- 
tions, this would sink only a few centimeters into the sandy soil; but 

A special problem connected with every dome is the acoustics. But to our 
relief prominent acoustical experts calculated that if we observed a few precautions 
there would be no need to worry. 



!55 ) The Globe 

to test this a sample section was built near Berlin. 6 Except for drawings 
and photographs of models, it is the only thing that has remained of 
the projected structure. 

In the course of the planning I had gone to see St. Peters in Rome. 
It was rather dashing for me to realize that its size had little to do with 
the impression it creates. In work on such a scale, I saw, effectiveness is 
no longer proportionate to the size of the building. I began to be afraid 
that our great hall would turn out disappointingly. 

Ministerial Councilor Knipfer, who was in charge of air-raid protec- 
tion in the Reich Air Ministry, had heard rumors about this gigantic 
structure. He had just issued directives providing that all future buildings 
be as widely dispersed as possible in order to diminish the effect of air 
raids. Now, here in the center of the city and of the Reich, a building 
was to be erected which would tower above low clouds and act as 
an ideal navigational guide to enemy bombers. It would be virtually 
a signpost for the government center. I mentioned these considerations 
to Hitler. But he was sanguine. "Goering has assured me," he said, "that 
no enemy plane will enter Germany. We will not let that sort of thing 
stand in the way of our plans." 

Hitler was obsessed with the idea for this domed building. We had 
already drawn up our designs when he heard that the Soviet Union was 
also planning an enormous assembly building in Moscow in honor of 
Lenin. He was deeply irked, feeling himself cheated of the glory of build- 
ing the tallest monumental structure in the world. Along with this was 
an intense chagrin that he could not make Stalin stop by a simple com- 
mand. But he finally consoled himself with the thought that his building 
would remain unique. "What does one skyscraper more or less amount to, 
a little higher or a little lower. The great thing about our building will be 
the dome!" After the war with the Soviet Union had begun, I now and 
then saw evidence that the idea of Moscow's rival building had preyed 
on his mind more than he had been willing to admit. "Now," he once said, 
"this will be the end of their building for good and all." 

The domed hall was to be surrounded on three sides by water which 
would reflect it and enhance its effect. For this purpose we intended 
to widen the Spree into a land of lake. The normal river traffic, however, 
would have to bypass this area through a set of underground canals. 
On its south side, the building would be flanked by the great plaza, 
the future Adolf Hitler Platz. Here the annual May 1 rallies would take 
place; these had previously been held on Tempelhof Field. 7 

The Propaganda Ministry had worked out a pattern for managing 
such mass rallies. In 1939, Karl Hanke told me of the variants of such 
demonstrations; which manner of demonstration was wanted depended 
on political and propagandists factors. From the gathering of school- 
children to cheer a foreign guest all the way to the mobilizing of millions 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 156 

of workers to express the will of the people, the Propaganda Ministry 
had a prepared scenario. Ironically, Hanke spoke of "cheering levies." 
Had the future gone according to plan, it would have taken the ultimate 
of all "cheering levies" to fill Adolf Hitler Platz, since it would hold a 
million people. 

One side of the square was to be bounded by the new High Command 
of the Armed Forces, the other by the Chancellery office building. The 
fourth side was open, permitting an enormous vista down the grand boule- 
vard. This would be the only opening in the gigantic square, otherwise 
hemmed in completely by buildings. 

Aside from the great hall, the most important and psychologically 
the most interesting of the buildings was to be Hitler's palace. It is no 
exaggeration to speak of a palace rather than the Chancellor's residence. 
As the preserved sketches show, Hitler had been thinking about this 
building as early as November 1938. 8 The architecture made plain his 
craving for status, which had increased by leaps and bounds since his 
accession to power. From the Chancellors residence of Bismarck's day 
into which he originally moved to this projected palace, the proportions 
had multiplied by a factor of one hundred and fifty. Even Nero's legen- 
dary palace area, the Golden House, with its expanse of more than 
eleven million square feet, would be outstripped by Hitler's palace. Right 
in the center of Berlin, it was to occupy, with the attached grounds, 
twenty-two million square feet. Reception rooms led through several 
series of salons into a dining hall which could have accommodated thou- 
sands. Eight vast entertainment halls were available for gala receptions.* 
The most modern stage equipment was to be provided for a theater of 
four hundred seats, an imitation of the ducal theaters of the baroque and 
rococo eras. 

From his own quarters Hitler could reach the great dome by a 
series of covered galleries. His offices, on the other hand, were conven- 
iently adjacent to the private apartment, and his personal office located 
at the very center of this official sector. Its measurements far exceeded 
the reception room of the President of the United States. 9 Hitler was 
so well pleased with the long hike the diplomats had to take in the 
recently completed new Chancellery that he wanted a similar device 
in the new building. I therefore doubled the distance visitors would have 
to traverse, making it somewhat more than a quarter of a mile. 

From the former Chancellery, built in 1931, Hitler's aspirations had 

* The eight public rooms would have had a total area of 161,400 square feet. 
The theater was to contain four hundred comfortable seats. Following the normal 
practice of allowing about two and a half square feet per seat in a theater, the 3,442 
square feet would have provided easily for eight hundred persons in the orchestra and 
another hundred and fifty in the balcony. Hitler planned to have a special box for 
himself in the theater. 



157 ) The Globe 

by now multiplied seventy-fold. 10 That gives some idea of the proportions 
by which his megalomania had evolved. 

And in the midst of all this splendor Hitler would have set up 
his white enameled bedstead in a bedroom of fairly modest dimensions. 
He once said to me: "I hate all show in a bedroom. I feel most comfortable 
in a simple ordinary bed." 

In 1939, when these plans were assuming tangible form, Goebbels's 
propaganda went on fostering the German people's belief in Hitler's 
modesty and simplicity. In order not to imperil tins image, Hitler said 
scarcely a word about the plans for his palatial private residence and 
the future Chancellery. But once, when we were tramping through the 
snow, he gave me justification for his soaring demands: 

You see, I myself would find a simple little house in Berlin quite suffi- 
cient. I have enough power and prestige; I don't need such luxury to sustain 
me. But believe me, those who come after me will find such ostentation an 
urgent necessity. Many of them will be able to hold on only by such means. 
You would hardly believe what power a small mind acquires over the people 
around him when he is able to show himself in such imposing circumstances. 
Such rooms, with a great historical past, raise even a petty successor to 
historical rank. You see, that is why we must complete this construction in 
my lifetime— so that I shall have lived there and my spirit will have con- 
ferred tradition upon the building. If I live in it only for a few years, that 
will be good enough. 

In his speeches to the construction workers of the Chancellery in 
1938, Hitler had made similar remarks, though of course without revealing 
any of his plans, which by then were already quite far advanced. As 
Leader and Chancellor of the German nation, he had said, he did not 
enter former palaces; that was why he had refused to move into the palace 
of the Reich President, for he was not going to live in a former Lord 
Chamberlain's residence. But in this area, too, he would see to it that 
the German state was provided with a public building that matched the 
prestigious edifices of any foreign king or emperor. 11 

Even at that time, Hitler ruled that we were not to worry about the 
costs of these buildings, and we therefore obediently omitted volume 
calculations. I have drawn them up for the first time only now, after 
a quarter of a century. The result is the following table: 

cubic yards 



1. Domed hall 


27,468,000 


2. Residential palace 


2,485,000 


3. Office suite and Chancellery 


1,569,000 


4. Appendant secretariats 


261,000 


5. High Command of the Armed Forces 


784,000 


6. New Reichstag 


457,000 



33,024,000 cubic yards 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 158 

Although the immense scale would have reduced the price per cubic 
yard, the total costs were almost inconceivable. For these vast structures 
would need enormous walls and correspondingly deep foundations. 
Moreover, the exterior walls were to be clad in expensive granite, the 
interior walls in marble. The very best materials were likewise to be 
employed for doors, windows, ceilings, and so on. A cost of five billion 
present-day marks for the buildings of Adolf Hitler Platz alone probably 
represents far too low an estimate. 12 

The shift in the mood of the population, the drooping morale which 
began to be felt throughout Germany in 1939, was evident in the necessity 
to organize cheering crowds where two years earlier Hitler had been 
able to count on spontaneity. What is more, he himself had meanwhile 
moved away from the admiring masses. He tended to be angry and 
impatient more often than in the past when, as still occasionally hap- 
pened, a crowd on Wilhelmsplatz began clamoring for him to appear. 
Two years before he had often stepped out on the "historic balcony." 
Now he sometimes snapped at his adjutants when they came to him with 
the request that he show himself: "Stop bothering me with that!" 

This seemingly small point had a certain bearing on the conception 
of the new Adolf Hitler Platz, for one day he said to me: "You know 
it is not out of the question that I shall some day be forced to take 
unpopular measures. These might possibly lead to riots. We must provide 
for that eventuality. All the buildings on this square must be equipped 
with heavy steel bulletproof shutters over their windows. The doors, too, 
must be of steel, and there should be heavy iron gates for closing off the 
square. It must be possible to defend the center of the Reich like a 
fortress." 

This remark betrayed a nervousness he had not had before. The 
same feeling emerged when we discussed the location of the barracks 
for the bodyguard, which had meanwhile grown into a fully motorized 
regiment armed with the most modern equipment. He shifted its head- 
quarters to the immediate vicinity of the grand southern axis. "Suppose 
there should be some disturbances!" he said. And pointing to the four 
hundred foot wide avenue: "If they come rolling up here in their armored 
vehicles the full width of the street— nobody will be able to put up any 
resistance." I do not know whether the army heard of this arrangement 
and wanted to be on the spot before the SS, or whether Hitler himself 
gave the order— but in any case, at the request of the army command and 
with Hitler's approval a barracks site was prepared even closer to the 
center for the Grossdeutschland guards regiment. 13 

I unwittingly gave expression to this separation of Hitler from his 
people— a Hitler who was ready to have soldiers fire upon the populace 
—in my design for the f a9ade of his palace. There was no opening in it 
except for the great steel entrance gate and a door to a balcony from 



159 ) The Globe 

which Hitler could show himself to the crowd. But this balcony was 
now suspended five stories high above the street. This frowning fa§ade 
still seems to me to communicate an accurate image of the remote 
Leader who had in the meantime moved into realms of self -idolatry. 

During my imprisonment, this design, with its red mosaics, its pillars, 
its bronze lions and gilded silhouettes, had assumed in my memory a 
bright, almost pleasant character. But when I once again saw the color 
photographs of the model, after a lapse of more than twenty-one years, I 
was struck by the resemblance to a Cecil B. De Mille set. Along with its 
fantastic quality I also became aware of the cruel element in this 
architecture. It had been the very expression of a tyranny. 

Before the war, I had laughed at an inkwell which the architect 
Brinckmann (who like Troost had originally designed steamship decor) 
had presented Hitler as a surprise gift. Brinckmann had made a solemn 
construction out of this simple utensil. It was a mass of ornamentation, 
scrolls and steps— and then, alone and forlorn amid all the magnificence 
of this "inkwell for the Chief of State," there was a tiny pool of ink. 
I thought I had never seen anything so abnormal. But contrary to my 
expectations Hitler did not disdain the object. In fact he praised this 
bronze inkwell immoderately. Brinckmann was no less successful with a 
desk chair he had designed for Hitler. It was veritably of Goeringesque 
proportions, a kind of throne with two oversized gilded pine cones 
topping the back. These two items, with their inflated bombast, seemed 
to me to reek of the parvenu. But from about 1937 on Hitler furthered 
this tendency toward pomposity by showing increasing approval of it. 
He had come round again to Vienna's Ringstrasse, where he had once 
begun. Slowly but steadily he moved even further away from the doctrines 
of Troost. 

And I moved with him. For my designs of this period owed less and 
less to what I regarded as "my style." This estrangement from my be- 
ginnings was revealed in other ways besides the wildly excessive size 
of my buildings. For they also no longer had any of the Dorian character 
I had originally tried to achieve. They had become pure "art of deca- 
dence." Wealth, the inexhaustible funds at my disposal, but also Hitler's 
party ideology, had led me along the path to a style which drew its 
inspiration rather from the show palaces of Oriental despots. 

At the beginning of the war, I had formed a theory which I explained 
at a dinner in Maxim's in Paris to a group of German and French artists. 
Cocteau and Despiau were among the latter. The French Revolution, I 
said, had developed a new sense of style which was destined to replace 
the late rococo. Even its simplest furniture was beautifully proportioned. 
This style, I argued, had found its purest expression in the architectural 
designs of Boullee. The Directoire that followed this revolutionary style 
had still treated their more abundant means with lightness and good 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( l6o 

taste. The turning point, I said, had come with the Empire style. From 
year to year new elements were introduced; elaborate ornamentation had 
been lavished upon the still classical basic forms until, at the end, Late 
Empire had achieved a resplendence and wealth that could scarcely be 
surpassed. Late Empire had expressed the end point of a stylistic 
evolution which had begun so promisingly with the Consulate. It had 
also expressed the transition from Revolution to the Napoleonic Empire. 
Within it were revealed signs of decay which were a forecast of the end 
of the Napoleonic era. Compressed within the span of twenty years, I 
said, we could observe a phenomenon that ordinarily took place only 
over centuries: the development from the Doric buildings of early 
antiquity to the fissured baroque facades of Late Hellenism, such as was 
to be seen in, say, Baalbek; or the Romanesque buildings at the beginning 
of the medieval period and the playful Late Gothic at its end. 

Had I been able to think the matter out consistently, I ought to have 
argued further that my designs for Hitler were following the pattern 
of the Late Empire and forecasting the end of the regime; that, there- 
fore, Hitler's downfall could be deduced from these very designs. But 
this was hidden from me at the time. Probably Napoleon s entourage 
saw in the ornate salons of the Late Empire only the expression of 
grandeur. Probably only posterity beholds the symptoms of downfall in 
such creations. Hitler's entourage, at any rate, felt the towering inkwell 
to be a suitable prop for his genius as a statesman, and similarly accepted 
my hulking dome as the symbol of Hitler's power. 

The last buildings we designed in 1939 were in fact pure neo- 
Empire, comparable to the style that prevailed a hundred and twenty- 
five years before, shortly before Napoleon's fall. They were marked by 
excessive ornamentation, a mania for gilding, a passion for pomp, and 
total decadence. And not only the style but the excessive size of these 
buildings plainly revealed Hitler's intention. 

One day in the early summer of 1939, he pointed to the German 
eagle with the swastika in its claws which was to crown the dome nine 
hundred fifty-seven feet in the air. "That has to be changed. Instead of the 
swastika, the eagle is to be perched above the globe. To crown this 
greatest building in the world the eagle must stand above the globe."* 
There are photos of the models in which this revision is plainly to be seen. 

A few months later the Second World War began. 



* As late as May 8, 1943, Goebbels noted in his diary: "The Fuehrer expresses 
his unshakable conviction that the Reich will one day rule all of Europe. We will have 
to survive a great many conflicts, but they will doubtless lead to the most glorious 
triumphs. And from then on the road to world domination is practically spread out 
before us. For whoever rules Europe will be able to seize the leadership of the world." 



12 
The Descent Begins 



About the beginning of august 1939 we, an untroubled group, drove 
with Hitler up to the Eagle's Nest. The long motorcade wound along the 
road which Bormann had blasted into the rock. Through a high bronze 
portal we entered a marble hall, damp from the moisture in the heart of 
the mountain, and stepped into the elevator of polished brass. 

As we rode up the hundred and sixty-five feet of shaft, Hitler said 
abruptly, as if he were talking to himself: "Perhaps something enormously 
important will happen soon. Even if I should have to send Goering. . . . 
But if need be I would even go myself. I am staking everything on this 
card." There was no more beyond this hint. 

Barely three weeks later, on August 21, 1939, we heard that the 
German Foreign Minister was in Moscow for some negotiations. During 
supper a note was handed to Hitler. He scanned it, stared into space 
for a moment, flushed deeply, then banged on the table so hard that 
the glasses rattled, and exclaimed in a voice breaking with excitement: 
"I have them! I have them!" Seconds later he had already regained con- 
trol of himself. No one dared ask any question, and the meal continued. 

After supper Hitler called his entourage together. "We are going 
to conclude a nonaggression pact with Russia. Here, read this. A tele- 
gram from Stalin." It briefly acknowledged the agreement that had been 
reached. To see the names of Hitler and Stalin linked in friendship on a 
piece of paper was the most staggering, the most exciting turn of events 

( 161) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 162 

I could possibly have imagined. Immediately afterward we were shown a 
movie depicting Stalin watching a Red army parade; a tremendous num- 
ber of troops marched past him. Hitler expressed his gratification that 
this military might was now neutralized. He turned to his military 
adjutants, evidently wanting to hear their estimate of the mass display of 
weapons and troops. The ladies were still excluded, but of course they 
soon heard the news from us, and shortly afterward it was announced 
on the radio. 

Goebbels held an evening press conference on August 23 in which he 
offered commentary on the pact. Hitler telephoned him immediately after- 
ward. He wanted to know how the foreign correspondents had reacted. 
With eyes glistening feverishly, he told us what Goebbels had said. "The 
sensation was fantastic. And when the church bells simultaneously began 
ringing outside, a British correspondent fatalistically remarked: 'That is 
the death knell of the British Empire.' " These words made the strongest 
impression upon Hider in his euphoria that night. He thought he now 
stood so high as to be out of the reach of fate. 

In the course of the night we stood on the terrace of the Berghof 
with Hitler and marveled at a rare natural spectacle. Northern lights 1 
of unusual intensity threw red light on the legend-haunted Untersberg 
across the valley, while the sky above shimmered in all the colors of 
the rainbow. The last act of Gotterdammerung could not have been more 
effectively staged. The same red light bathed our faces and our hands. 
The display produced a curiously pensive mood among us. Abruptly 
turning to one of his military adjutants, Hitler said: "Looks like a great 
deal of blood. This time we won t bring it off without violence/' 2 

Weeks before, the center of Hitler's interests had already shifted 
to the military area. In long talks with his four military adjutants- 
Colonel Rudolf Schmundt for the High Command of the Aimed Services 
(OKW); Captain Gerhard Engel for the Army, Captain Nikolaus von 
Below for the air force, and Captain Karl-Jesko von Puttkamer for the 
navy— Hitler tried to arrive at definitive plans. He seemed to especially 
like these young and unbiased officers, all the more since he was always 
seeking approval, which they were more likely to give him than the 
perhaps better informed but skeptical generals. 

During these days immediately after announcement of the German- 
Russian pact, however, he saw less of the adjutants than of the political 
and military heads of the German Reich, among them Goering, Goebbels, 
Keitel, and Ribbentrop. Goebbels above all spoke openly and anxiously 
about the danger of war. Surprisingly, the usually radical Propaganda 
Minister considered the risk excessively large. He tried to recommend 
a peaceful line to Hitler's entourage and was particularly acrid toward 
Ribbentrop, whom he regarded as the chief representative of the war 
party. We who were members of Hitler's personal circle considered him 
as well as Goering, who also counseled peace, weaklings who had de- 



163 ) The Descent Begins 

generated in the luxury of power and did not want to risk the privileges 
they had acquired. 

Even though my future as an architect was also at stake, I thought 
that the solution of national questions must take precedence over per- 
sonal interests. Any doubts I might have had were quelled by the 
self-assurance Hitler showed. In those days he seemed to me like a hero of 
ancient myth who unhesitantly, in full consciousness of his strength, could 
enter upon and masterfully meet the test of the wildest undertakings.* 

Whoever did belong to the actual war party, aside from Hitler and 
Ribbentrop, had worked out arguments more or less as follows: 

Let us assume that because of our rapid rearmament we hold a four 
to one advantage in strength at the present time. Since the occupation of 
Czechoslovakia the other side has been rearming vigorously. They need 
at least one and a half to two years before their production will reach its 
maximum yield. Only after 1940 can they begin to catch up with our rela- 
tively large headstart. If they produce only as much as we do, however, 
our proportional superiority will constantly diminish, for in order to maintain 
it we would have to go on producing four times as much. We are in no 
position to do so. Even if they reach only half of our production, the propor- 
tion will constantly deteriorate. Right now, on the other hand, we have new 
weapons in all fields, the other side obsolete types. 3 

Considerations of this sort probably did not govern Hitler s de- 
cisions, but they undoubtedly influenced his choice of the time to 
strike. For the present, however, he remarked: "I shall stay at Ober- 
salzberg as long as possible, in order to keep myself fresh for the 
difficult days to come. Ill go to Berlin only when decisions become 
essential." 

Only a few days later Hitler's motorcade was moving along the 
autobahn to Munich. There were ten cars at long distances from one 
another, for security. My wife and I were in one of the cars. It was 
a beautiful, cloudless sunny day at the end of summer. The populace 
remained unusually silent as Hitler drove by. Hardly anyone waved. 
In Berlin, too, it was strikingly quiet in the vicinity of the Chancellery. 
Usually, when Hitler's private standard was raised to indicate his 
presence, the building was besieged by people who cheered him as 
he drove out and in. 

In the nature of things I was excluded from the further course of 
events— all the more so because the normal routine of Hitler's day was 
turned topsy-turvy during this tumultuous spell. After the court moved 

* And, in fact, nine months previously I had had bas-reliefs portraying the 
Hercules legend installed on the new Chancellery. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 164 

to Berlin, an incessant series of conferences fully occupied Hitler's 
time. Our common meals were for the most part canceled. Memory 
can be peculiarly arbitrary, and among my most vivid recollections is 
the somewhat comic picture of Bernardo Attolico, the Italian Ambas- 
sador, rushing breathlessly into the Chancellery a few days before 
the attack upon Poland. He was bringing word that for the present 
Italy could not keep its obligations under the alliance. The Duce 
cloaked this bad news in impossible demands for immediate delivery 
of a vast quantity of military and economic goods. Granting such de- 
mands could have resulted in a disastrous weakening of the German 
armed forces. Hitler had a high regard for the fighting strength of the 
Italian fleet in particular, with its modern units and large number of 
submarines. He was equally convinced of the effectiveness of the big 
Italian air force. For a moment he thought his plans had been ruined, 
for he assumed that Italy's bellicosity would help frighten the Western 
powers. In some dismay, he postponed the assault on Poland, which 
had already been ordered. 

But this temporary retreat soon yielded to new hopes; his instincts 
told him that even with Italy defaulting, the West might still shrink 
from declaring war. He therefore rejected Mussolini's offer to mediate; 
he would hold back no longer, he said, for if the army were held in 
suspense too long it would grow nervous. Besides, the period of good 
autumn weather would soon pass, and during the later rainy season 
there was danger of the troops bogging down in the Polish mud. 

Notes on the Polish question were exchanged with England. Out of 
the rush of events I particularly remember one evening in the con- 
servatory of the Chancellor's residence. I had the impression that 
Hitler looked exhausted from overwork. He spoke with deep convic- 
tion to his intimate circle: "This time the mistake of 1914 will be 
avoided. Everything depends on making the other side accept respon- 
sibility. In 1914 that was handled clumsily. And now again the ideas 
of the Foreign Office are simply useless. The best thing is for me to 
compose the notes myself." As he spoke he held a page of manuscript 
in his hand, probably the draft of a note from the Foreign Office. He 
hastily took his leave, not joining us for dinner, and vanished into the 
upper rooms. Later, in prison, I read that exchange of notes; it did not 
seem to me that Hitler had carried out his intent very well. 

Hitler s view that the West would once more give in to his de- 
mands as it had done at Munich was supported by intelligence informa- 
tion: An officer on the British General Staff was said to have evaluated 
the strength of the Polish army and come to the conclusion that Polish 
resistance would soon collapse. Hitler thus had reason to hope that 
the British General Staff would do everything in its power to advise its 
government against so hopeless a war. When, on September 3, the 
Western powers followed up their ultimatum with declarations of war, 



165 ) The Descent Begins 

Hitler was initially stunned, but quickly reassured himself and us by 
saying that England and France had obviously declared war merely 
as a sham, in order not to lose face before the whole world. In spite 
of the declarations there would be no fighting; he was convinced 
of that, he said. He therefore ordered the Wehrmacht to remain 
strictly on the defensive. He felt that this decision of his showed 
remarkable political acumen. 

During those last days of August Hitler was in an unwonted state 
of nerves and at times completely lost the reassuring air of infallible 
leader. The hectic activities were followed by an uneasy period of 
quiet. For a short time Hitler resumed his customary daily routine. 
Even his interest in architectural plans revived. To his round table he 
explained: "Of course we are in a state of war with England and France, 
but if we on our side avoid all acts of war, the whole business will 
evaporate. As soon as we sink a ship and they have sizable casual- 
ties, the war party over there will gain strength." Even when German 
U-boats lay in a favorable position near the French battleship Dun- 
kerque he refused to authorize an attack. But the British air raid on 
Wilhelmshaven and the sinking of the Athenia soon called for a re- 
consideration of this policy. 

He stuck unswervingly to his opinion that the West was too feeble, 
too worn out, and too decadent to begin the war seriously. Probably it 
was also embarrassing for him to admit to his entourage and above all 
to himself that he had made so crucial a mistake. I still remember his 
consternation when the news came that Churchill was going to enter 
the British War Cabinet as First Lord of the Admiralty. With this ill- 
omened press report in his hand, Goering stepped out of the door 
of Hitlers salon. He dropped into the nearest chair and said wearily: 
"Churchill in the Cabinet. That means that the war is really on. Now we 
shall have war with England." From these and other observations 
I deduced that this initiation of real war was not what Hitler had 
projected. 

His illusions and wish-dreams were a direct outgrowth of his 
unrealistic mode of working and thinking. Hitler actually knew nothing 
about his enemies and even refused to use the information that was 
available to him. Instead, he trusted his inspirations, no matter how 
inherently contradictory they might be, and these inspirations were 
governed by extreme contempt for and underestimation of the others. 
In keeping with his classic phrase that there were always two possi- 
bilities, he wanted to have the war at this supposedly most favorable 
moment, while at the same time he failed to adequately prepare for it. 
He regarded England, as he once stressed, as "our enemy Number 
One," 4 while at the same time hoping to come to an arrangement with 
that enemy. 

I do not think that in those early days of September, Hitler was 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( l66 

fully aware that he had irrevocably unleashed a world war. He had 
merely meant to move one step further. To be sure, he was ready to 
accept the risk associated with that step, just as he had been a year 
before during the Czech crisis; but he had prepared himself only for 
the risk, not really for the great war. His naval rearmament was ob- 
viously planned for a later date; the battleships as well as the first 
large aircraft carriers were still under construction. He knew that 
they would not attain full military value until they could face the 
enemy on more or less even terms. Moreover, he had spoken so often 
of the neglect of the submarine arm in the First World War that he 
probably would not have knowingly begun the Second without pre- 
paring a strong fleet of U-boats. 

But all his anxieties seemed to be scattered to the winds in early 
September, when the campaign in Poland yielded such successes for 
the German troops. Hitler seemed to recover his assurance swiftly, and 
later, at the climax of the war, I frequently heard him say that the 
Polish campaign had been a necessary thing. 

Do you think it would have been good fortune for our troops if we had 
taken Poland without a fight, after obtaining Austria and Czechoslovakia 
without fighting? Believe me, not even the best army can stand that sort 
of thing. Victories without loss of blood are demoralizing. Therefore it was 
not only fortunate there was no compromise; at the time we would have 
had to regard it as harmful, and I therefore would have struck in any case. 5 

It may be, nevertheless, that by such remarks he was trying to 
gloss over his diplomatic miscalculations of August 1939. On the other 
hand, toward the end of the war Colonel General Heinrici told me 
about an early speech of Hitler's to the generals which points in the 
same direction. I noted down Heinrici's remarkable story as follows: 
"Hitler said that he was the first man since Charlemagne to hold 
unlimited power in his own hand. He did not hold this power in vain, 
he said, but would know how to use it in a struggle for Germany. If 
the war were not won, that would mean that Germany had not stood 
the test of strength; in that case she would deserve to be and would be 
doomed." 6 

From the start the populace took a far more serious view of the 
situation than did Hitler and his entourage. Because of the general 
nervousness a false air-raid alarm was sounded in Berlin early in Sep- 
tember. Along with many other Berliners I sat in a public shelter. The 
atmosphere was noticeably depressed; the people were full of fear about 
the future. 7 

None of the regiments marched off to war decorated with flowers 




Near Oberammergau, 1925. Albert Speer with his fiancee, Margarete 
Weber, both at the age of nineteen. ( speer-archiv ) 



©aufcitmig (Broker [in. 



(Saiiflefrfjafloftclle: 

If. 4»i •Cl.l.,e,a 1 («. W. «. i'.rlln 1JJ7W 







Abschrift 



•Merlin, ben lO.Iiovenber 193 2 



left: Goebbelss letter of 
commendation to Speer for 
completing new party 
office in record time. 

( SPEER-ARCHIV ) 



Sohr gechrter Herr Speer 

llach Ferticatellunc unserer neuen Ge3chiifts- 
a telle in iter Vos33trusse apreche ieh Ihnan fiir die von 
Ihnen geleiatete Arbeit meine voile Ancrkennuns and wcirm- 
sten Dunk BlaB. 

V/ir haben e3 ftana beaonders ancenehm ecipf unden, 
dass 5 la trotz der sehr knapp bemessenen Zeit den'umbau 
so rechtzeitic fertica tell ten, daaa wir die 7/ahlarbeit 
bereits in der ncuen Gcachiif tss telle in hngtltt nchmen 
konnten. Ihr rsiboagalossa Zu3a;;.:nenarbeitcn rait .--lien 
IV.rteidicnststeJ len ur.d vor alien iHncen mit den Handwer- 
kern hat una don vVechsol von wiuerer Gcschaf tsstelle 
k a Utt s glUrij'ai* v; e r d e n 1 a a a c r. . 



Guns besonder 
cinfachc, rahlgti Linie 
auccci~i.hr ten Inneneinri 
nes Arbeit Haii:..:ncrs , der 
arbeitcr und insbesondcj 



i v.' i rd v o r. in i r die h and w e r ! : 1 i c h 
lor von I l:nen entworfer.cn and 
jhtung dea liausco, beaonders raei- 
Arbeitai-ir- nor seiner engercr. :.:it- 
,*o der bciden SitsUngSQUl-tf gewerte 



t;oz. Dr. G o 



below: Goebbels at the 
Sportpalast in Berlin, 1Q32. 
( associated press photo ) 





Hitler greeting crowds from window of the Chancellery, spring 1Q33- 

( SPIEGEL-ARCHIV ) 




The new balcony at the Chancellery. 

(SPIEGEL-ARCHIV) 



Hitler and T roost examining model of the 
Hans der Kunst, 1933- 

( IIEINRICH HOFFMANN ) 




w* 



.*«• 



■A 



& 






: & le **mm 




Hitler looking a&Speer's architectural plans at 



( HEINRICH HOFFMANN ' 



■fefe^feft*^ 


: 


' ^Z 




Mil 






&9 




^ N 


k mm*wm 
— \ 













above: Hitler asleep in his 
Mercedes, 1934. 

( HEINIttCH HOFFMANN ) 

right: Cheering crowd 
stops Hitlers car, 1935. 

( HEINRICH HOFFMANN ) 

below: Clearing the way 
for Hitlers car, 1935. 

( HEINRICH HOFFMANN ) 









'%? 






i Hitler welcomed by Bavarian peasants, 1Q35. Behind Hitler an adjutant 

(Martin Bormanns brother Albert). In background, Heinrich Hoffmann, 

I Hitlers photographer, and SS bodyguards, (max ehlert) 




Wooden model of Nuremberg Stadium (400,000 seats), designed by 
Albert Speer. Although the model was completed in iqsG, the stadium 
was never begun. ( heinrich Hoffmann ) 





Hitler in Nuremberg icith SS Ober- 
gruppenfuhrer Jitttner and his trusty 
adjutant, Julius Schaub. 

( HEINRICH HOFFMANN ) 

Trial section of Nuremberg Stadium. Left to 
right: Mayor Liebel of Nuremberg, 
Liebermann, architectural engineer for the 
Stadium, Brugmann, head of the Nuremberg 
building administration, and Albert Speer. 

(SPEER-ARCHIV) 





Speers eagle— over one hundred feet in luingspread, crowning the 
temporary stands at the Zeppelin airfield. "7 spiked it to timber 
framework like a butterfly in a collection!' 

( ASSOCIATED PRESS PHOTO ) 




Ill 



fa* 



■ 




.****?*•• 



m^^SSm^f' 







(Pff» 




£5,J*j 


^T^WftrrAYiflM 


. 




■ 


flfi.i IVvrfl 



peers dramatic lighting effect at the, Nuremberg Tarty Rally, I 
creating wliat Sir Neville Henderson called "a cathedral of ice! 

( SPIEGEL-ARCHIV ) 



M f 





Hitler sound asleep amid his entourage at the teahouse, 
Obersalzberg. On his right, Eva Braun. (blick -f- bild) 






left: Hitler inspecting the newly 
completed long gallery in the Chancellery 
designed by Speer (January j, iQ39)> First 
roto, left to right: Martin Bormann, Hitler, 
Speer , Theodor M or ell, Heinrich Hoffmann. 
Second row: Albert Bormann, Kramer 
(Hitler s valet), unknown SS adjutant, 
Dr. Haase (surgeon), unknown. 

( HEINRICH HOFFMANN ) 

above : Garden fagade of the Neto 
Chancellery. 

( SPIEGEL- ARCHIV) 

below: The new Cabinet Room, never 

used by Hitler. 

( bilderdienst suddeutscher verlag ) 



167 ) The Descent Begins 

as they had done at the beginning of the First World War. The streets 
remained empty. There was no crowd on Wilhelmsplatz shouting for 
Hitler. It was in keeping with the desolate mood that Hitler had his 
bags packed into the cars one night to drive east, to the front. Three 
days after the beginning of the attack on Poland he had his adjutant 
summon me to the provisionally blacked-out residence in the Chancellery 
to bid me good-by. I found a man who lost his temper over trivialities. 
The cars drove up, and he tersely took his leave of the "courtiers" who 
were remaining behind. Not a soul on the street took notice of this 
historic event: Hitler driving off to the war he had staged. Obviously 
Goebbels could have provided a cheering crowd of any size, but he 
was apparently not in the mood to do it. 

Even during the mobilization Hitler did not forget his artists. In 
the late summer of 1939, orders were given that their draft records be 
sent to Hitler's adjutant by the various army districts. He then tore up the 
papers and threw them away. By this original device, the men ceased 
to exist for the draft boards. On the list drawn up by Hitler and Goebbels, 
however, architects and sculptors occupied little space. The overwhelm- 
ing majority of those thus exempted were singers and actors. The fact 
that young scientists were also important for the future was not dis- 
covered until 1942, and then with my help. 

While still at Obersalzberg I had telephoned Will Nagel, my former 
superior and now head of my staff, and asked him to begin forming a 
technical assistance group under my leadership. We wanted to put our 
well-coordinated team of construction supervisors to use in rebuilding 
bridges, extending or widening roads, and similar areas of the war effort. 
However, our notions about what we could do immediately were ex- 
tremely vague. For the time being it consisted of no more than getting 
sleeping bags and tents ready, and painting my car field-gray. On the day 
of general mobilization I went to the High Command of the Army on 
Bendlerstrasse. As might be expected in a Prusso-German organization, 
General Fromm, who was responsible for the army mobilization, sat idle 
in his office while the machinery ran according to plan. He readily ac- 
cepted my offer of assistance; my car was given an army number, and I 
myself army identification papers. For the present, that was the extent 
of my wartime activity. 

It was Hitler who tersely forbade me to undertake any missions for 
the army. My duty, he told me, was to continue working at his plans. 
Thereupon I at least placed the workmen and the technical staffs em- 
ployed on my buildings in Berlin at the disposal of the army and industry. 
We took charge of the Peenemunde site for the development of rockets 
and of some urgent buildings for the aircraft industry. 

I informed Hitler of these commitments, which seemed to me the 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( l68 

least I could do. I was confident of his approval. But to my surprise 
there came an unusually rude letter from Bormann. What was I doing 
choosing new assignments, he demanded. I had received no such orders. 
Hitler had asked him to let me know that all building projects were to 
proceed unchecked. 

This order provides another example of how unrealistically and 
dividedly Hitler thought. On the one hand he repeatedly asserted that 
Germany was now being challenged by fate and had to wage a life-and- 
death struggle; on the other hand he did not want to give up his grandiose 
toys. In making such choices, moreover, he was disregarding the mood of 
the masses, who were inevitably baffled by the construction of such luxury 
buildings, now that Hitler's expansionism was beginning to demand sacri- 
fices. This order of his was the first one I shirked. It was true that I saw 
Hitler far more rarely during this first year of the war. But whenever he 
came to Berlin for a few days, or to Obersalzberg for a few weeks, he still 
asked to be shown the building plans and urged me to go on developing 
them. But I think he soon tacitly accepted the cessation of actual work on 
the buildings. 

Around the beginning of October the German Ambassador in Mos- 
cow, Count von Schulenburg, informed Hitler that Stalin was personally 
interested in our building plans. A series of photographs of our models 
was exhibited in the Kremlin, but on Hitler's instructions our largest 
buildings were kept secret in order, as he said, "not to give Stalin any 
ideas." Schulenburg had proposed that I fly to Moscow to explain the 
plans. "He might keep you there," Hitler commented half jokingly, and 
refused to let me take the trip. A short while afterward, Schnurre, a 
member of the embassy staff, informed me that Stalin had liked my 
sketches. 

On September 29, Ribbentrop returned from his second Moscow con- 
ference with a German-Soviet frontier and friendship treaty which 
was to seal the fourth partition of Poland. At Hitler's table he recounted 
that he had never felt so much at ease as among Stalin's associates: "As 
if I were among old party comrades of ours, mein Fuhrer!" Hitler 
listened without a flicker of expression to this burst of enthusiasm on the 
part of the normally impassive Foreign Minister. Stalin, so Ribbentrop 
declared, seemed satisfied with the border arrangements, and when 
it was all settled drew in his own hand on the map along the border of 
the zone assigned to Russia an area which he presented to Ribbentrop 
as a vast hunting preserve. At this Goering's hackles rose; he insisted 
that Stalin could hardly have meant this gift to apply to the Foreign 
Minister personally. On the contrary, it was a grant to the German Reich 
and consequently to himself as Reich Master of the Hunt. A hot dispute 
broke out between the two passionate hunters which ended with the 
Foreign Minister sulking, for Goering proved more forceful in argument 
and better able to get his way. 



169 ) The Descent Begins 

In spite of the war the renovation of the former palace of the 
Reich President, which was to be the Foreign Minister's new official 
residence, had to proceed. Hitler inspected the nearly completed building 
and showed dissatisfaction. Hastily and recklessly, Ribbentrop thereupon 
ordered the new annex torn down and rebuilt. Probably in order to 
please Hitler he insisted on clumsy marble doorways, huge doors, and 
moldings which were quite unsuitable for rooms of middling size. Before 
the second inspection I begged Hitler to refrain from making negative 
comments, or else the Foreign Minister would order a third rebuilding. 
Hitler actually held his tongue, and only later in his intimate circle did he 
make fun of the building, which to his mind was an utter failure. 

In October, Hanke told me something which had been learned when 
German troops met Soviet troops on the demarcation line in Poland: 
that Soviet equipment appeared extremely deficient, in fact wretched. 
Hanke had reported this to Hitler. Army officers confirmed this point; 
Hitler must have listened to this piece of intelligence with the keenest 
interest, for thereafter he repeatedly cited this report as evidence that 
the Russians were weak and poorly organized. Soon afterward, the 
failure of the Soviet offensive against Finland confirmed him in this view. 

In spite of all the secrecy I obtained some light on Hitler's further 
plans when he gave me the assignment, still in 1939, to fit out a head- 
quarters for him in western Germany. Ziegenberg, a manorial estate of 
Goethe's time, situated near Nauheim in the foothills of the Taunus range, 
was modernized by us for this purpose, and provided with shelters. 

When the arrangements were completed, millions of marks 
squandered on building, telephone cables laid over hundreds of miles, 
and the most modern communications equipment installed, Hitler 
abruptly decided that the place was too luxurious for him. In wartime 
he must lead a simple life, he said, and therefore quarters conceived 
in this spirit were to be built for him in the Eifel hills. This may have 
made an impression upon those who did not know how many millions of 
marks had already been expended and how many more millions would 
now have to be spent. We pointed this out to Hitler, but he would not be 
swayed, for he saw his reputation for "modesty" imperiled. 

After the swift victory in France, I was firmly convinced that Hitler 
had already become one of the great figures in German history. Yet I 
wondered at the apathy I thought I observed in the public despite all 
the grand triumphs. Hitler's self-confidence was obviously growing by 
leaps and bounds. He had found a new theme for his monologues at 
table. His great concept, he declared, had not run afoul of the inade- 
quacies which had caused Germany to lose the First World War. In those 
days there had been dissension between the political and the military 
leadership, he said. The political parties had been given leeway to 
undermine the unity of the nation and even to engage in treasonous 
activities. For reasons of protocol incompetent princes of the ruling 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 1J0 

houses had to be commanders of their armies; they were supposed to 
earn military laurels in order to increase the glory of their dynasties. The 
only reason that enormous disasters had been averted was that these 
incompetent scions of decadent royal families had been assigned excellent 
General Staff officers to aid them. Moreover, at the top as supreme war 
lord had been the incompetent Wilhelm II. Today, on the other hand, 
Germany was united. The states had been reduced to unimportance, the 
army commanders were selected from among the best officers without 
regard to their descent, the privileges of the nobility had been abolished, 
political life and the army as well as the nation as a whole had been 
forged into a unity. Moreover, he, Hitler, stood at the head. His strength, 
his determination, his energy would overcome all future difficulties. 

Hitler claimed total credit for the success of the campaign in the 
West. The plan for it came from him, he said. "I have again and again," 
he told us, "read Colonel de Gaulle's book on methods of modern war- 
fare employing fully motorized units, and I have learned a great deal 
from it." 

Shortly after the end of the campaign in France, I received a tele- 
phone call from the office of the Fuehrer's adjutant: I was to come to head- 
quarters for a few days for a special purpose. Hitler had set up temporary 
headquarters in the small village of Bruly le Peche near Sedan. The 
village had been cleared of all inhabitants. The generals and adjutants 
were established in the small houses that lined the single village street. 
Hitler's own quarters in no way differed from those of the others. At 
my arrival he greeted me in the best of humors. "In a few days we are 
flying to Paris. I'd like you to be with us. Breker and Giessler are coming 
along also." With that I was dismissed for the present, astonished that 
the victor had sent for three artists to accompany him on his entry into 
the French capital. 

That same evening I was invited to dine with Hitler's military circle. 
Details of the trip to Paris were discussed. This was not to be an official 
visit, I learned, but a kind of "art tour" by Hitler. This was the city, 
as he had so often said, which had fascinated him from his earliest 
years, so that he thought he would be able to find his way about the 
streets and important monuments as if he had lived there, solely from 
his endless studies of its plans. 

The armistice was to go into effect at 1:35 AM - on J 11116 2 5> 194°- 
That night we sat with Hitler around a deal table in the simple room 
of a peasant house. Shortly before the agreed time Hitler gave orders 
to turn out the light and open the windows. Silently, we sat in the dark- 
ness, swept by the sense of experiencing a historic moment so close 
to the author of it. Outside, a bugler blew the traditional signal for the 
end of fighting. A thunderstorm must have been brewing in the distance, 



171 ) The Descent Begins 

for as in a bad novel occasional flashes of heat lightning shimmered 
through the dark room. Someone, overcome by emotion, blew his nose. 
Then Hitlers voice sounded, soft and unemphatic: "This responsi- 
bility . . ." And a few minutes later: "Now switch the light on." The 
trivial conversation continued, but for me it remained a rare event. I 
thought I had for once seen Hitler as a human being. 

Next day I set out from headquarters for Rheims, to see the 
cathedral. A ghostly looking city awaited me, almost deserted, ringed 
by military police protecting the champagne cellars. Casement windows 
banged in the wind, newspapers of several days ago blew through the 
streets, open front doors revealed interiors. It was as if ordinary life had 
stood still for a foolish moment. Glasses, dishes, and half-eaten meals 
could be seen on the tables. En route we had encountered innumerable 
refugees along the roads; they used the sides of the roads, for the middle 
was taken up by columns of German army units. These self-assured troops 
between the worn-looking people transporting their worldly goods in 
baby carriages, wheelbarrows, and other primitive vehicles made a 
striking contrast. Three and a half years later I saw similar scenes in 
Germany. 

Three days after the beginning of the armistice we landed at Le 
Bourget airfield. It was early in the morning, about five-thirty. Three large 
Mercedes sedans stood waiting. Hitler as usual sat in the front seat beside 
the chauffeur, Breker and I on the jump seats behind him, while Giessler 
and the adjutants occupied the rear seats. Field-gray uniforms had been 
provided for us artists, so that we might fit into the military framework. 
We drove through the extensive suburbs directly to the Opera, Charles 
Garnier's great neobaroque building. It was Hitler's favorite and the first 
thing he wanted to see. Colonel Speidel, assigned by the German Occupa- 
tion Authority, was waiting at the entrance for us. 

The great stairway, famous for its spaciousness, notorious for its 
excessive ornamentation, the resplendent foyer, the elegant, gilded 
parterre, were carefully inspected. All the lights glowed as they would 
on a gala night. Hitler had undertaken to lead the party. A white-haired 
attendant accompanied our small group through the deserted building. 
Hitler had actually studied the plans of the Paris opera house with great 
care. Near the proscenium box he found a salon missing, remarked on it, 
and turned out to be right. T&e attendant said that this room had been 
eliminated in the course of renovations many years ago. "There, you see 
how well I know my way about," Hitler commented complacently. He 
seemed fascinated by the Opera, went into ecstasies about its beauty, 
his eyes glittering with an excitement that struck me as uncanny. The 
attendant, of course, had immediately recognized the person he was 
guiding through the building. In a businesslike but distinctly aloof man- 
ner, he showed us through the rooms. When we were at last getting ready 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 172 

to leave the building, Hitler whispered something to his adjutant, 
Bruckner, who took a fifty-mark note from his wallet and went over to 
the attendant standing some distance away. Pleasantly, but firmly, the 
man refused to take the money. Hitler tried a second time, sending 
Breker over to him; but the man persisted in his refusal. He had only 
been doing his duty, he told Breker. 

Afterward, we drove past the Madeleine, down the Champs Elysees, 
on to the Trocad6ro, and then to the Eiffel Tower, where Hitler ordered 
another stop. From the Arc de Triomphe with its tomb of the Unknown 
Soldier we drove on to the Invalides, where Hitler stood for a long 
time at the tomb of Napoleon. Finally, Hitler inspected th e Pantheon , 
whose proportions greatly impressed him. On the other hand he showed 
no special interest in some of the most beautiful architectural works in 
Paris: the Place des Vosges, the Louvre, the Palace of Justice, and Sainte- 
Chapelle. He became animated again only when he saw the unitary row 
of houses on the Rue de Rivoli. The end of our tour was the romantic, 
insipid imitation of early medieval domed churches, the church of 
Sacre Coeur on Montmartre— a surprising choice, even given Hitler's 
taste. Here he stood for a long time surrounded by several powerful 
men of his escort squad, while many churchgoers recognized him but 
ignored him. After a last look at Paris we drove swiftly back to the 
airport. By nine o'clock in the morning the sightseeing tour was over. 
"It was the dream of my life to be permitted to see Paris. I cannot say 
how happy I am to have that dream fulfilled today." For a moment I 
felt something like pity for him: three hours in Paris, the one and only 
time he was to see it, made him happy when he stood at the height of 
his triumphs. 

In the course of the tour Hitler raised the question of a victory 
parade in Paris. But after discussing the matter with his adjutants and 
Colonel Speidel, he decided against it after all. His official reason for 
calling off the parade was the danger of its being harassed by English air 
raids. But later he said: "I am not in the mood for a victory parade. We 
aren't at the end yet." 

That same evening he received me once more in the small room in 
the peasant house. He was sitting alone at table. Without more ado 
he declared: "Draw up a decree in my name ordering full-scale resump- 
tion of work on the Berlin buildings. . . . Wasn't Paris beautiful? But 
Berlin must be made far more beautiful. In the past I often considered 
whether we would not have to destroy Paris," he continued with great 
calm, as if he were talking about the most natural thing in the world. 
"But when we are finished in Berlin, Paris will only be a shadow. So 
why should we destroy it?" With that, I was dismissed. 

Although I was accustomed to hearing Hitler make impulsive re- 
marks, I was nevertheless shocked by this cool display of vandalism. He 



173 ) The Descent Begins 

had reacted in a similar fashion to the devastation of Warsaw. At the 
time he had announced that he was not going to allow the city to be 
rebuilt, in order to deprive the Polish people of their political and cul- 
tural center. Warsaw, however, had been devastated by acts of war. 
Now Hitler was showing that he could entertain the thought of wantonly 
and without cause annihilating the city which he himself had called the 
most beautiful in Europe, with all its priceless artistic treasures. Within 
a few days some of the contradictions in Hitlers nature had been re- 
vealed to me, although at the time I certainly did not perceive them in 
anything like their full intensity. He contained a multitude of selves, 
from a person deeply aware of his responsibilities all the way to a ruthless 
and mankind-hating nihilist. 

The effect of this experience however was quickly obscured for me. 
I was once again seduced by Hitler's brilliant victories and by the pros- 
pect of soon resuming work on my building projects. Now it was up to 
me to surpass Paris. Nothing more was said of razing her monuments. 
Instead, Hitler gave orders that our own be erected with maximum 
urgency. As he himself reworded the decree: "Berlin is to be given the 
style commensurate with the grandeur of our victory," and he further 
declared: "I regard the accomplishment of these supremely vital con- 
structive tasks for the Reich as the greatest step in the preservation of 
our victory." He antedated this decree to June 25, 1940, the day of the 
armistice and of his greatest triumph. 

Hitler was pacing back and forth on the gravel path in front of 
his house, accompanied by Generals Jodl and Keitel, when an adjutant 
came to tell him that I wished to take my leave. I was summoned, and 
as I approached the group I heard a snatch of the conversation: "Now 
we have shown what we are capable of," Hitler was saying. "Believe 
me, Keitel, a campaign against Russia would be like a child's game in 
a sandbox by comparison." In radiant good humor, he bade me good- 
by, sent his warmest regards to my wife, and promised that he would 
soon be discussing new plans and models with me. 



13 

Excess 



Even while hitler was deep in the plans for the Russian campaign, 
his mind was already dwelling on theatrical effects for the victory 
parades of 1950, once the grand boulevard and the great triumphal arch 
had been completed. 1 But while he dreamed of new wars, new victories 
and celebrations, he suffered one of the greatest defeats of his career. 
Three days after a talk with me in which he had outlined more of his 
conceptions of the future, I was called to Obersalzberg with my sketches. 
Waiting in the anteroom at the Berghof, pale and agitated, were Leitgen 
and Pintsch, two of Hess's adjutants. They asked if I would let them see 
Hitler first; they had a personal letter from Hess to transmit to him. At 
this moment Hitler descended from his room upstairs. One of the adju- 
tants was called into the salon. While I began leafing through my 
sketches once more, I suddenly heard an inarticulate, almost animal out- 
cry. Then Hitler roared: "Bormann, at once! Where is Bormann?" Bor- 
mann was told to get in touch with Goering, Ribbentrop, Goebbels, and 
Himmler by the fastest possible means. All private guests were confined 
to the upper floor. Many hours passed before we learned what had hap- 
pened: Hitler's deputy had flown to hostile England. 

Superficially, Hitler soon appeared to have regained his usual com- 
posure. What bothered him was that Churchill might use the incident to 
pretend to Germany's allies that Hitler was extending a peace feeler. 
'Who will believe me when I say that Hess did not fly there in my name, 

(174) 



175 ) Excess 

that the whole thing is not some sort of intrigue behind the backs of 
my allies?" Japan might even alter her policy because of this, he fretted. 
He put through a phone call to Ernst Udet, the famous First World War 
fighter pilot and now technical chief of the air force, and wanted to know 
whether the two-motored plane Hess was using could reach its goal in 
Scotland and what weather conditions it would encounter. After a brief 
interval Udet called back to say that Hess was bound to fail for naviga- 
tional reasons alone; because of the prevailing side winds he would prob- 
ably fly past England and into empty space. For a moment Hitler regained 
hope: 'If only he would drown in the North Sea! Then he would vanish 
without a trace, and we could work out some harmless explanation at our 
leisure." But after a few hours his anxieties returned, and in order to antici- 
pate the British in any case he decided to announce over the radio that 
Hess had gone mad. The two adjutants, however, were arrested— as the 
harbingers of bad news used to be at the courts of ancient despots. 

A rush of activity began at the Berghof . Aside from Goering, Goeb- 
bels, and Ribbentrop, Ley, various Gauleiters, and other party leaders 
arrived. Ley, as organizational chief of the party, made a bid to take over 
Hess's duties. In organizational terms this was no doubt what should have 
happened. But Bormann now showed for the first time how much influence 
he had over Hitler. He made short work of fending off Ley's proposal, and 
took the post for himself. Churchill commented at the time that this flight 
showed the presence of a worm in the German apple. He could not pos- 
sibly have guessed how literally this phrase applied to Hess's successor. 

Henceforth, Hess was scarcely ever mentioned in Hitler's entourage. 
Bormann alone looked into the affairs of his former superior and showed 
great zeal in visiting the sins of her husband on Frau Hess. Eva Braun 
tried to intercede with Hitler on her behalf, but unsuccessfully; later 
she gave her a small allowance behind Hitler's back. A few weeks later 
I heard from my doctor, Professor Chaoul, that Hess's father was dying. 
I sent him flowers, though without disclosing myself as the sender. 

At the time it appeared to me that Bormann's ambition had driven 
Hess to this desperate act. Hess, also highly ambitious, could plainly see 
himself being excluded from access to and influence over Hitler. Thus, 
for example, Hitler said to me some time in 1940, after a conversation 
with Hess lasting many hours: "When I talk with Goering, it's like a bath 
in steel for me; I feel fresh afterward. The Reich Marshal has a stimu- 
lating way of presenting things. With Hess every conversation becomes 
an unbearably tormenting strain. He always comes to me with unpleasant 
matters and won t leave off." By his flight to England, Hess was probably 
trying, after so many years of being kept in the background, to win pres- 
tige and some success. For he did not have the qualities necessary for 
survival in the midst of a swamp of intrigues and struggles for power. He 
was too sensitive, too receptive, too unstable, and often told all factions 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 176 

they were in the right, in the order of their appearance. As a type he 
undoubtedly corresponded to the majority of the high party leaders; like 
him, most of them had great difficulty keeping the ground of reality under 
their feet. 

Hitler put the blame for Hess's flight on the corrupting influence of 
Professor Haushofer.* Twenty-five years later, in Spandau prison, Hess 
assured me in all seriousness that the idea had been inspired in him in a 
dream by supernatural forces. He said he had not at all intended to 
oppose or embarrass Hitler. "We will guarantee England her empire; 
in return she will give us a free hand in Europe." That was the message 
he took to England— without managing to deliver it. It had also been one 
of Hitler s recurrent formulas before and occasionally even during the 
war. 

If I judge correctly, Hitler never got over this "disloyalty" on the 
part of his deputy. Some while after the assassination attempt of July 
20, 1944, he mentioned, in the course of one of his fantastic misreadings 
of the real situation, that among his conditions for peace was the extra- 
dition of the "traitor." Hess would have to be hanged, he said. When I 
told Hess about this later, he commented: "He would have made it up 
with me. I'm certain of it. And don't you believe that in 1945, when 
everything was going to smash, he sometimes thought: 'Hess was right 
after all'?" 

Hitler went even further than insisting that the Berlin buildings be 
pushed forward at full speed in the midst of war. Under the influence 
of his Gauleiters he also wildly lengthened the list of cities slated for 
reconstruction. Originally they had been only Berlin, Nuremberg, Mu- 
nich, and Linz. Now, by personal decrees, he declared another twenty- 
seven cities, including Hanover, Augsburg, Bremen, and Weimar, to be 
"reconstruction cities." 2 Neither I nor anyone else was ever asked about 
the feasibility of such decisions. Instead, after each such conference I 
merely received a copy of the decree Hitler had informally issued. Ac- 
cording to my estimate at the time the costs for party buildings alone 
in those reconstruction cities would be, as I wrote to Bormann on 
November 26, 1940, between 22 and 25 billion marks. 

I thought that my own deadlines were being imperiled by these 
requirements. At first I tried to secure a decree from Hitler placing all 
building plans throughout the Reich under my authority. But when this 

* Hess had first introduced Hitler to Professor Karl Haushofer, a former general 
and founder of the theories of "geopolitics." His ideas strongly influenced Hitler's 
early thinking, but Haushofer evidently did not go all the way with Nazism. His son, 
Albrecht Haushofer, was arrested for participation in the July 20, 1944, conspiracy, 
and was shot in the closing days of the war. Professor Haushofer committed suicide 
after his son's death. 



177 ) Excess 

effort was blocked by Bormann, I told Hitler on January 17, 1941— after 
a long illness that had given me time to reflect on many problems— 
that it would be better if I were to concentrate only upon the buildings 
in Nuremberg and Berlin which had been assigned to me. Hitler in- 
stantly agreed: "You're right. It would be a pity if you threw away your 
energies on general matters. If necessary you can declare in my name 
that I, the Fuehrer, do not wish you to become involved in these other 
matters lest you be led away from your proper artistic tasks." 3 

I availed myself generously of this exemption, and during the next 
few days resigned all my party offices. If I can sort out my motives at 
the time, this step was probably also directed against Bormann, who 
had been hostile to me from the start. I knew I was in no danger, how- 
ever, since Hitler had frequently referred to me as irreplaceable. 

Occasionally I was caught amiss, at which times Bormann could 
deliver a sharp reproof to me from headquarters, undoubtedly with 
satisfaction. Thus, for example, I had consulted with the Protestant and 
Catholic authorities on the location of churches in our new section of 
Berlin.* Bormann curtly informed me that churches were not to receive 
building sites. 

Hitler s decree of June 25, 1940, for the "preservation of our victory" 
was tantamount to an order for work to go forward on the buildings in 
Berlin and Nuremberg. A few days later, however, I made it clear to 
Reich Minister Lammers that of course we did not "intend to proceed 
at once with the practical reconstruction of Berlin ... as long as the 
war was going on." But Hitler remonstrated and commanded con- 
tinuance of the building operations even though to do so ran against 
public feeling. Again on his insistence I set up a "Fuehrer s immediate 
program," in the light of which Goering— this was in the middle of 
April 1941— assigned the necessary quantity of iron to me. It amounted 
to eighty-four thousand tons annually. To camouflage the operation from 
the public, the program was given the code name "War program for 
waterways and Reich railways, Berlin section." On April 18, Hitler and 
I again discussed deadlines: for the completion of the great hall, the 
High Command of the Armed Forces, the Chancellery, the Fuehrers 
building— in short, for his power centers around Adolf Hitler Platz. He 
was still determined to have that complex erected as quickly as possi- 
ble. Simultaneously, an association of seven of the best German con- 
struction firms was organized for the purpose of speeding the work. 

With his characteristic obstinacy and in spite of the impending 
campaign against the Soviet Union, Hitler personally continued to take 
a hand in the selection of paintings for the Linz gallery. He sent his 

* As yet we had only agreed to compensate the churches for those of their build- 
ings situated in parts of the inner city which were slated for demolition. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 178 

art dealers into the occupied areas to comb the picture market there, 
with the result that there was soon a bitter contest between his dealers 
and Goering^. The picture war had begun to take a nasty turn when 
Hitler finally reproved his Reich Marshal and thereby once and for all 
restored the order of rank even in regard to art dealers. 

In 1941 large catalogues bound in brown leather arrived at Ober- 
salzberg. They contained photographs of hundreds of paintings which 
Hitler personally distributed among his favorite galleries: Linz, Konigs- 
berg, Breslau, and other eastern cities. At the Nuremberg Trials, I saw 
these volumes again as evidence for the prosecution. The majority of 
the paintings had been seized from Jewish owners by Rosenberg's Paris 
office. 

Hitler made no inroads on the famous state art collections of 
France. However, this restraint was not so unselfish as it seemed, for 
he occasionally remarked that in a peace treaty the best pieces from 
the Louvre would have to be delivered to Germany as part of war 
reparations. But Hitler did not utilize his authority for his private ends. 
He did not keep in his own possession a single one of the paintings 
acquired or confiscated in the occupied territories. 

Goering, on the other hand, went about increasing his art collec- 
tion during the war by any means whatsoever. The halls and rooms of 
Karinhall were sheathed with valuable paintings hung one above the 
other in three and four tiers. He even had a life-size nude representing 
Europa mounted above the canopy of his magnificent bed. He himself 
also dabbled in art dealing: The walls of one large hall of his country 
estate were covered with paintings. They had been the personal prop- 
erty of a well-known Dutch art dealer who after the occupation had 
been compelled to turn over his collection to Goering for a ridiculous 
price. In the middle of the war Goering sold these pictures to Gaulei- 
ters, as he told me with a childlike smile, for many times what he had 
paid— adding, moreover, an extra something to the price for the glory 
of the paintings having come "from the famous Goering collection." 

One day— it must have been sometime in 1943— I heard from a 
French intermediary that Goering was pressing the Vichy government 
to exchange a famous painting belonging to the Louvre for several of 
the worthless pictures in his own collection. Knowing Hitler s views 
about the inviolability of the Louvre's collection, I was able to advise 
the French informant not to yield to this pressure; if Goering should 
persist in the matter, he was to let me know. Goering, however, let it 
drop. On the other hand, one day at Karinhall he showed me the Ster- 
zing Altar, which had been presented to him by Mussolini after the 
agreement on South Tyrol in the winter of 1940. Hitler was often outraged 
by the way the "Second Man in the State" appropriated valuable works 
of art, but he never dared call Goering to account. 

Toward the end of the war Goering invited my friend Breker and 



179 ) Excess 

me to afternoon dinner at Karinhall— this was a rare and exceptional 
occasion. The meal was not too lavish, but I was rather taken aback 
when at its end an ordinary brandy was poured for us, while Goering's 
servant poured his, with a certain solemnity, from a dusty old bottle. 
"This is reserved for me alone," he commented without embarrassment 
to his guests and went on about the particular French palace in which 
this rare find had been confiscated. Afterward, in an expansive mood, 
he showed us the treasures stowed away in the Karinhall cellar. Among 
them were some priceless classical pieces from the Naples Museum; 
these had been removed before the evacuation of Naples at the end of 
1943. With the same pride of ownership he had his cupboards opened 
to allow us a glimpse of his hoard of French soaps and perfumes, a 
stock that would have sufficed for years. At the conclusion of this dis- 
play he sent for his collection of diamonds and other precious stones, 
obviously worth hundreds of thousands of marks. 

Hitler's purchases of paintings stopped after he had appointed 
the head of the Dresden Gallery, Dr. Hans Posse, as his agent for 
building the Linz collection. Until then Hitler had chosen his purchases 
himself from the auction catalogues. In the course of this he had oc- 
casionally been victimized by his habit of appointing two or three rivals 
to carry out a particular assignment. There were times when he would 
have separately instructed both his photographer, Heinrich Hoffmann, 
and one of his art dealers, to bid without limit. The result was that Hitler's 
two emissaries kept fearlessly outbidding one another long after all other 
bidders had dropped out. This went on until one day Hans Lange, the 
Berlin auctioneer, called my attention to this state of affairs. 

Shortly after the appointment of Posse, Hitler showed him his 
previous acquisitions, including the Griitzner collection. The showing 
took place in Hitler's air-raid shelter, where he had stored these treasures 
for safety. Chairs were brought in for Posse, Hitler, and myself, and SS 
orderlies carried in picture after picture. Hitler went on about his 
favorite paintings in his usual way, but Posse refused to be over- 
powered either by Hitler's position or by his engaging amiability. Ob- 
jective and incorruptible, he turned down many of these expensive 
acquistions: "Scarcely useful," or "Not in keeping with the stature of 
the gallery, as I conceive it." As was so often the case when Hitler was 
dealing with a 1 specialist, he accepted the criticisms without demur. 
Posse rejected most of the pictures by painters of Hitler's beloved 
Munich School. 

In the middle of November 1940, Molotov arrived in Berlin. Hitler 
and his dinner guests greatly relished the tale carried by his physician, 
Dr. Karl Brandt, that the Soviet Foreign Minister's staff had all plates 
and silverware boiled before use for fear of German germs. 

In the salon at the Berghof stood a large globe on which, a few 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( l8o 

months later, I found traces of this unsuccessful conference. One of the 
army adjutants pointed out, with a significant look, an ordinary pencil 
line: a line running from north to south along the Urals. Hitler had 
drawn it to indicate the future boundary between his sphere of interest 
and that of the Japanese. On June 21, 1941, the eve of the attack on 
the Soviet Union, Hitler called me into his Berlin salon after dinner, 
had a record put on and a few bars from Liszt's Les Pr&udes played. 
"You'll hear that often in the near future, because it is going to be our 
victory fanfare for the Russian campaign. Funk chose it. How do you 
like it?* . . . We'll be getting our granite and marble from there, in any 
quantities we want." 

Hitler was now openly manifesting his megalomania. What his 
building plans had been implying for years was now to be sealed "in 
blood," as he put it, by a new war. Aristotle once wrote in the Politics: 
"It remains true that the greatest injustices proceed from those who 
pursue excess, not from those who are driven by necessity." 

For Ribbentrop's fiftieth birthday in 1943 several of his close as- 
sociates presented him with a handsome casket, ornamented with semi- 
precious stones, which they intended to fill with photocopies of all the 
treaties and agreements concluded by the Foreign Minister. "We were 
thrown into great embarrassment," Ambassador Hewel, Ribbentrop's 
liaison man, remarked to Hitler at supper, "when we were about to fill 
the casket. There were only a few treaties that we hadn't broken in the 
meantime." 

Hitler's eyes filled with tears of laughter. 

As had happened at the beginning of the war, I was again op- 
pressed by the idea of pushing forward with such vast building opera- 
tions, drawing upon all available means, when the great war was 
obviously reaching a crucial stage. On July 30, 1941— while the German 
advance in Russia was still proceeding boldly— I proposed to Dr. Todt, 
who was in charge of the entire German construction industry, that 
work be suspended on all buildings not essential for the war effort. 4 
Todt, however, thought that in view of the present favorable state of 
military operations we could wait a few weeks more before facing this 
question. The question was to be deferred altogether, for my argu- 
ments once again made no impression on Hitler. He would not hear of 
any restrictions and refused to divert the material and labor for his 
private buildings to war industries any more than he would consider 
calling a halt to his favorite projects, the autobahns, the party buildings, 
and the Berlin projects. 

For each of the previous campaigns Hitler had personally chosen a musical 
fanfare that preceded radio announcements of striking victories. 



181 ) Excess 

In the middle of September 1941, when the advance in Russia was 
already lagging considerably behind the overconfident forecasts, Hitler 
ordered sizable increases in our contracts for granite purchases from 
Sweden, Norway, and Finland for my big Berlin and Nuremberg build- 
ings. Contracts to the value of thirty million Reichsmarks had been 
awarded to the leading companies in the Norwegian, Finnish, Italian, 
Belgian, Swedish, and Dutch stone industry. 5 In order to bring these vast 
quantities of granite to Berlin and Nuremberg, we founded (on June 4, 
1941) a transport fleet of our own and set up our own shipyards in Wismar 
and Berlin, with plans to build a thousand boats with a cargo capacity 
of five hundred tons each. 

My proposals that we cease peacetime building continued to be 
disregarded even when the outlines of the disaster of the winter of 1941 
in Russia began to be apparent. On November 29, 1941, Hitler told me 
bluntly: "The building must begin even while this war is still going on. 
I am not going to let the war keep me from accomplishing my plans." 

After the initial successes in Russia, moreover, Hitler decided that 
we wanted even more martial accents for our boulevard. These were 
to be supplied by captured enemy armaments set up on granite pede- 
stals. On August 20, 1941, on Hitlers orders, I informed an astonished 
Admiral Lorey, commander of the Berlin armory, that we intended to 
place thirty pieces of captured heavy artillery between the south sta- 
tion and the triumphal arch ("Structure T," as we privately called it). 
There were other points, I informed the admiral, on the grand boule- 
vard and along the southern axis where Hitler wanted to place such 
guns, so that we would need about two hundred pieces of the heaviest 
type in toto. Any extra large tanks were to be reserved for setting up in 
front of important public buildings. 

Hitler's ideas about the political constitution of his "Teutonic Em- 
pire of the German Nation" still seemed quite vague, but he had 
already made up his mind about one point: In the immediate vicinity of 
the Norwegian city of Trondheim, which offered a particularly favor- 
able strategic position, the largest German naval base was to arise. 
Along with shipyards and docks a city for a quarter of a million Ger- 
mans would be built and incorporated into the German Reich. Hitler 
had commissioned me to do the planning. On May 1, 1941, I obtained 
from Vice Admiral Fuchs of the High Command of the Navy the 
necessary data on the space required for a large state-owned shipyard. 
On June 21, Grand Admiral Raeder and I went to the Chancellery to 
report to Hitler on the project. Hitler then determined the approximate 
site of the city. As much as a year later, on May 13, 1942, he discussed 
this base in the course of a conference on armaments. 7 Special maps 
were prepared from which he studied the optimum position of the 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 182 

docks, and he decided that a large underground submarine base was 
to be blasted into the granite cliff. For the rest, Hitler assumed that St. 
Nazaire and Lorient in France, as well as the British Channel Islands, 
would be incorporated into a future naval base system. Thus he disposed 
at will of territories, interests, and rights belonging to others; by now he 
was totally convinced of his world dominion. 

In this connection I must mention his plan for founding German 
cities in the occupied areas of the Soviet Union. On November 24, 
1941, in the very midst of the winter catastrophe, Gauleiter Meyer, 
deputy of Alfred Rosenberg, the Reich Minister for the occupied east- 1 
ern territories, asked me to take over the section on "new cities" and 
plan and build the settlements for the German garrisons and civil 
administrations. I finally refused this offer at the end of January 1942 
on the grounds that a central authority for city planning would inevita- 
bly lead to a uniformity of pattern. I instead suggested that the great 
German cities each stand as sponsor for the construction of the new ones. 8 

Ever since I had begun, at the beginning of the war, to assume 
responsibilty for erecting buildings for the army and air force, I had 
considerably expanded the organization entrusted with this work. To 
be sure, by the standards of a few months hence, the twenty-six 
thousand construction workers employed on these military programs 
by the end of 1941 would be insignificant. But at this time I was proud 
of being able to make a small contribution to the war effort; it eased 
my conscience not to be engaged entirely on Hitlers peacetime plans. 
The most pressing task was the Ju 88 Program for the air force, which 
was to turn out the new two-motored, medium-range Junkers 88 dive 
bombers. Three big factories in Briinn, Graz, and Vienna, each of them 
larger than the Volkswagen plant, were completed within eight months. 
For the first time we used prefabricated concrete elements. From the 
autumn of 1941 on, however, our work was hampered by the shortage 
of fuel. Even though our programs had top priority, in September 1941 
the amounts of fuel assigned to them had to be reduced by a third, and 
by January 1, 1942, to a sixth of our needs. 9 That is just one example of 
how greatly Hitler had overextended his resources by embarking on 
the Russian campaign. 

Along with this, repair of the bomb damage in Berlin and the 
building of air-raid shelters had been turned over to me. Without sus- 
pecting it, I was thus preparing for my duties as Minister of Arma- 
ments. For one thing, this gave me some insight into the havoc wreaked 
on the mechanisms of production by the constant arbitrary shifts in 
programs and priorities. For another thing, it taught me a good deal 
about the power relationships and the dissensions within the leader- 
ship. 



183 ) Excess 

For example, I took part in a session with Goering in the course of 
which General Thomas expressed his anxieties about the vast demands 
the leadership was making upon the economy. Goering answered the 
respected general by roaring at him: 'What business is that of yours? 
I am handling that— I am, do you hear. Or are you by any chance in charge 
of the Four- Year Plan? You have nothing to say in this matter; the 
Fuehrer has entrusted all these questions to me alone." In such dis- 
putes General Thomas could expect no support from his chief, General 
Keitel, who was only too glad to escape being bullied by Goering. The 
well-conceived economic plan of the Armaments Office of the High 
Command of the Armed Forces was never carried out. But as I had 
already realized by then, Goering did nothing about these problems. 
Whenever he did do anything, he usually created total confusion, since 
he never took the trouble to work through the problems but made his 
decisions on the basis of impulsive inspirations. 

A few months later, around November 1941, in my capacity as 
chief of armaments construction I took part in a conversation between 
Field Marshal Milch and Dr. Todt. In the autumn of 1941, Hitler was 
convinced that the Russians were already defeated; he therefore wanted 
priority to be given to building up the air force in preparation for 
his next operation, the subjugation of England.* Milch now insisted 
on this priority, as was his duty— while Dr. Todt, who knew something 
about the military situation, was close to despair. For he too was re- 
sponsible for increasing the equipment of the army as fast as possible, 
but lacked an order from Hitler which would have given his assign- 
ment the necessary priority. At the end of the conference Todt summed 
up his helplessness: "It would be best, sir, if you'd take me into your 
ministry and let me be your assistant." 

It was again in the fall of 1941 that I visited the Junkers plant in 
Dessau to see General Manager Koppenberg and discuss how to co- 
ordinate our building programs with his production plans. After we 
had worked the matter out, he led me into a locked room and showed 
me a graph comparing American bomber production for the next 
several years with ours. I asked him what our leaders had to say about 
these depressing comparative figures. "That's just it, they won't believe 
it," he said. Whereupon he broke into uncontrollable tears. But Goering, 
the Commander in Chief of the then heavily engaged Luftwaffe, had 
plenty of leisure. On June 23, 1941, the day after the beginning of the 

* This order of Hitler's was still in effect in December 1941, although the situa- 
tion had changed radically. Hitler hesitated to withdraw such orders, partly because 
he had a general tendency to hesitate and partly because he was concerned about 
saving face. A new order consistent with the exigencies of the war, giving army equip- 
ment priority over air force equipment, as required by the circumstances, was not 
issued until January 10, 1942. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 184 

attack on the Soviet Union, he found time to dress in his gala uni- 
form and come with me to see the models of his Reich Marshal's office, 
which were being exhibited in Treptow. 

My last art tour for a quarter of a century took me to Lisbon, 
where on November 8 an exhibit of new German architecture was be- 
ing opened. I was supposed to fly in Hitler s plane; but when it ap- 
peared that some of the alcoholic members of his entourage, such as 
Adjutant Schaub and the photographer Hoffmann, wanted to go along 
on the flight, I shook off their company by proposing to Hitler that I 
drive to Lisbon in my car. I saw ancient cities such as Burgos, Segovia, 
Toledo, and Salamanca; I visited the Escorial, a complex I could com- 
pare only to Hitler s Fuehrer palace in its proportions, although the 
underlying impulse was quite different and far more spiritual: Philip 
II had surrounded the palace nucleus with a monastery. What a con- 
trast with Hitlers architectural ideas: in the one case, remarkable con- 
ciseness and clarity, magnificent interior rooms, their forms perfectly 
controlled; in the other case, pomp and disproportionate ostentation. 
Moreover, this rather melancholic creation by the architect Juan de 
Herrera (1530-97) more closely matched our ominous situation than 
Hitlers boastful program music. In hours of solitary contemplation it 
began to dawn on me for the first time that my recent architectural 
ideals were on the wrong track. 

Because of this trip I missed the visit to Berlin of several Parisian 
acquaintances, among them Vlaminck, Derain, and Despiau, 10 who at 
my invitation had come to see the models of our plans for Berlin. They 
must have looked in dead silence at our project and at the buildings 
that were going up; the office journal does not record a word about 
the impression that our exhibit made on them. I had met them during 
my stays in Paris and through my office had several times helped them 
out with commissions. Curiously enough, they had more freedom than 
their German colleagues. For when I visited the Salon d'Automne in 
Paris during the war, the walls were hung with pictures which would 
have been branded degenerate art in Germany. Hitler, too, had heard 
of this show. His reaction was as surprising as it was logical: "Are we 
to be concerned with the intellectual soundness of the French people? 
Let them degenerate if they want to! All the better for us." 

While I was on my trip to Lisbon, a transportation disaster had 
developed behind the fronts in the eastern theater of war. The Ger- 
man military organization had been unable to cope with the Russian 
winter. Moreover, the Soviet troops in the course of their retreat had 
systematically wiped out all locomotive sheds, watering stations, and 
other technical apparatus of their railroad system. In the intoxication 



185 ) Excess 

of success during the summer and autumn when it seemed that "the 
Russian bear is already finished," no one had given sufficient thought to 
the repair of this equipment. Hitler had refused to understand that 
such technical measures must be taken well ahead of time, in view of 
the Russian winter. 

I heard about these difficulties from high officials of the Reichs- 
bahn (the government railroad system) and from army and air force 
generals. I thereupon proposed to Hitler that thirty thousand of the 
sixty-five thousand German construction workers I was employing be 
assigned under the direction of my engineers, to repair work on the 
railroads. Incredibly, it was two weeks before Hitler could bring him- 
self to authorize this. On December 27, 1941, he at last issued the order. 
Instead of hurling construction crews into the breach at the beginning 
of November, he had gone on with his triumphal buildings, determined 
not to capitulate in any way to reality. 

On that same December 27, I had a meeting with Dr. Todt in his 
modest house on Hintersee near Berchtesgaden. He assigned the entire 
Ukraine to me as my field of activity, while staffs and workmen who 
had all along been frivolously engaged in working on the autobahns 
were made responsible for the central and northern areas of Russia. 
Todt had just returned from a long tour of inspection in the eastern 
theater of war. He had seen stalled hospital trains in which the 
wounded had frozen to death and had witnessed the misery of the 
troops in villages and hamlets cut off by snow and cold. He had been 
struck by the discouragement and despair among the German soldiers. 
Deeply depressed himself, he concluded that we were both physically 
incapable of enduring such hardships and psychologically doomed to 
destruction in Russia. "It is a struggle in which the primitive people 
will prove superior," he continued. "They can endure everything, in- 
cluding the harshness of the climate. We are too sensitive and are 
bound to be defeated. In the end the victory will go to the Russians 
and the Japanese." Hitler too, obviously influenced by Spengler, had 
expressed similar ideas in peacetime when he spoke of the biological 
superiority of the "Siberians and Russians." But when the campaign 
in the east began, he thrust aside his own thesis, for it ran counter to 
his plans. 

Hitler's passion for building, his blind attachment to his personal 
hobbies, stimulated the same sort of thing in his imitative paladins, so 
that most of them had assumed the life style of victors. Even at that 
time I felt that here was one dangerous flaw in Hitler s system. For 
unlike the democratic regimes, there could be no public criticism; no 
demand could arise that these abuses be corrected. On March 19, 1945, 
in my last letter to Hitler, I reminded him of this tendency: "I was 
sore at heart in the victorious days of 1940 when I saw how we were 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( l86 

losing, among a broad spectrum of our leadership, our inner discipline. 
That was the very time when we ought to have proved our worthiness 
to Providence by decency and inner modesty." 

Though these lines were written five years later, they confirm the 
fact that at the time I saw the mistakes, winced at the abuses, took a 
critical stand, and was tormented by doubts and skepticism. But I must 
admit that these feelings were born from my fear that Hitler and his 
leadership might gamble away the victory. 

In the middle of 1941, Goering inspected our model city on Pariser 
Platz. In a moment of affability he made an unusual remark to me: "I 
have told the Fuehrer," he said, "that I consider you, after him, the 
greatest man Germany possesses." But as second man in the hierarchy 
he felt he had better qualify this statement: "In my eyes you are abso- 
lutely the greatest architect. I would like to say that I esteem you as 
highly for your architectural creativity as I do the Fuehrer for his 
political and military abilities." 11 

After nine years as Hitler's architect I had worked my way up to 
an admired and uncontested position. The next three years were to 
confront me with entirely different tasks which for a time actually made 
me the most important man after Hitler. 



PART 



TWO 



Start in My New Office 



SEPP DIETRICH, ONE OF HITLER'S EARLIEST FOLLOWERS AND NOW THE COM- 

mander of an SS tank corps hard pressed by the Russians near Rostov 
in the southern Ukraine, was flying to Dnepropetrovsk on January 30, 
1942, in a plane of the Fuehrer s air squadron. I asked him to take me 
along. My staff was already in the city, organizing the task of repairing 
the railroads in southern Russia.* The obvious idea of having a plane 
placed at my disposal had not occurred to me— a sign of how small a role 
in the war effort I so far attributed to myself. 

Huddled close together, we sat in a Heinkel bomber refitted as a 
passenger plane. Beneath us the dreary, snow-covered plains of southern 
Russia flowed by. On large farms we saw the burned sheds and barns. 
To keep our direction, we flew along the railroad line. Scarcely a train 
could be seen; the stations were burned out, the roundhouses destroyed. 
Roads were rare, and they too were empty of vehicles. The great stretches 
of land we passed over were frightening in their deathly silence, which 
could be felt even inside the plane. Only gusts of snow broke the mon- 
otony of the landscape— or, rather, emphasized it. This flight brought home 

* According to the Office Journal, beginning on January 28, 1942, a train left 
Berlin every day carrying construction workers and building materials to the Ukraine. 
Several hundred workers had already been sent ahead to Dnepropetrovsk to make 
preparations. 

(189) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 190 

to me the danger to the armies almost cut off from supplies. At dusk we 
landed in the Russian industrial city of Dnepropetrovsk. 

My group of technicians was called the "Speer Construction Staff" 
—in keeping with the bent of the period to link assignments with the 
names of individuals. They had taken up emergency quarters in a sleep- 
ing car. From time to time a locomotive sent a whiff of steam through the 
heating coils to keep them from freezing. Working conditions were just 
as grim; for our office we had only a dining car. The assignment was 
proving more formidable than we had thought. The Russians had des- 
troyed all the intermediate stations. Nowhere were repair sheds still 
standing, nowhere were water tanks protected from freezing, nowhere 
were there stations or intact switching yards. The simplest matters, which 
at home could have been settled by a telephone call, became a problem 
here. Even lumber and nails were hard to come by. 

It snowed and snowed. Railroad and highway traffic had come to a 
total standstill. The airport runway was drifted over. We were cut off; 
my return had to be postponed. Socializing with our construction work- 
men filled the time; get-togethers were held, songs sung. Sepp Dietrich 
made speeches and was cheered. I stood by; with my awkwardness at 
speechmaking I did not dare say even a few words to my men. Among 
the songs distributed by the army corps were some very melancholy ones, 
expressing the longing for home and the dreariness of the Russian steppes. 
These songs were undisguised statements of inner stress, and significantly 
enough, they were the soldiers' favorite songs. 

Meanwhile the situation was growing critical. A small Russian tank 
group had broken through and was approaching Dnepropetrovsk. We 
held conferences on what we could use to oppose them. Virtually nothing 
was available; a few rifles and an abandoned artillery piece without am- 
munition. The Russians advanced to within about twelve miles, then 
circled around aimlessly in the steppe. One of the mistakes so typical of 
war happened; they did not take advantage of their situation. A brief 
sortie to the long bridge over the Dnieper and destroying it by fire— it 
had been rebuilt in wood in months of toilsome work— would have cut 
off the German army southeast of Rostov from winter supplies for several 
months more. 

I am not at all disposed to be a hero, and since the seven days of my 
stay had been of no use whatsoever and I was only eating into my en- 
gineers' scarce provisions, I decided to go along on a train that was going 
to attempt to break through the snowdrifts to the west. My staff gave me 
a friendly— and it seemed to me thankful— farewell. All night we went 
along at six or seven miles an hour, stopped, shoveled snow, rode again. 
I thought we were a good deal farther to the west at dawn, when the 
train pulled into a deserted station. 

But everything looked oddly familiar to me: burned sheds, clouds 



191 ) Start in My New Office 

of steam above a few dining cars and sleeping cars, patrolling soldiers. 
We were back in Dnepropetrovsk. The huge drifts had forced the train 
to turn back. Depressed, I tramped into my construction staffs dining car, 
where my associates received me with astonished and, I felt, rather irri- 
tated expressions. After all, they had pillaged their stocks of alcohol until 
the early morning hours drinking to their chiefs departure. 

On that same day, February 7, 1942, the plane that had flown Sepp 
Dietrich in was to start on the return flight. Air Captain Nein, who was 
soon to be pilot of my own plane, was willing to take me with him. Just 
getting out to the airfield involved considerable difficulty. Under a clear 
sky and at a temperature barely above zero, a violent wind was whipping 
masses of snow in all directions. Russians in padded jackets tried in vain 
to clear the many feet of snow from the road. After we had tramped along 
for about an hour, several of them surrounded me and addressed me ex- 
citedly. I did not understand a word. Finally one of them picked up some 
snow and began rubbing my face with it. "Frozen," I thought; I knew 
that much from my mountain tours. My astonishment grew when one of 
the Russians took from his filthy clothes a snow-white and neatly folded 
handkerchief to dry my face. 

After some difficulty, around eleven o'clock we managed to take off 
from a runway poorly cleared of drifts. The plane's destination was Ras- 
tenburg in East Prussia, the headquarters of the squadron. My destina- 
tion was Berlin, but it was not my plane and so I was glad that at least 
I would be taken a considerable part of the way. By this chance I for the 
first time came to Hitler's East Prussian headquarters. 

In Rastenburg, I telephoned one of the adjutants in the hope that he 
would report my presence to Hitler and perhaps Hitler would want to 
talk with me. I had not seen him since the beginning of December, and 
it would have been a special distinction if he were at least to give me a 
brief greeting. 

One of the Fuehrer's cars drove me to headquarters. There I at last 
had a good meal in the dining barracks where Hitler ate daily with his 
generals, political associates, and adjutants. Hitler himself was not 
present. Dr. Todt, the Minister of Armaments and Munitions, was report- 
ing to him, and the two were dining alone in Hitler's private apartment. 
Meanwhile, I discussed our difficulties in the Ukraine with Army Trans- 
port Chief General Gercke and the commander of the railroad engineer- 
ing troops. 

After supper with a large group, Hitler and Todt continued their 
conference. It was late at night before Todt emerged, strained and fa- 
tigued, from a long and— it appeared— trying discussion. He wore a de- 
pressed air. I sat with him for a few minutes while he silently drank 
a glass of wine without speaking of the reason for his mood. By chance 
he mentioned, in the course of our rather lame conversation, that he was 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 1<)2 

to fly back to Berlin next morning and that there was an unoccupied seat 
in his plane.* He said he would be glad to take me along, and I was 
relieved not to have to make that long trip by rail. We agreed to fly at 
an early hour, and Dr. Todt bade me good night, since he was going to 
try to get a little sleep. 

An adjutant came in and requested me to join Hitler. It was then 
after one o'clock in the morning; in Berlin, too, we had often sat over 
our plans at this hour. Hitler seemed as exhausted and out of sorts as 
Todt. The furniture of his room stressed spareness; he had even re- 
nounced the comfort of an upholstered chair here at headquarters. We 
talked about the Berlin and Nuremberg building projects, and Hitler 
visibly brightened. Even his sallow complexion seemed to take on color. 
Finally he asked me to tell him what impressions I had gathered on my 
visit to southern Russia and helped me along by interjecting questions. 
The difficulties in restoring the railroad equipment, the blizzards, the 
incomprehensible behavior of the Russian tank force, the social evenings 
with their melancholy songs— bit by bit everything I had observed came 
out. When I mentioned the songs his attention sharpened, and he asked 
about the words. I produced the text I had in my pocket. He read it and 
said nothing. My opinion was that the songs were the natural response 
to a grim situation. Hitler, however, decided at once that some traitor 
was trying to undermine morale. He thought my story would enable him 
to track down this "oppositionist." Not until after the war did I learn that 
he had ordered a court-martial of the officer responsible for printing 
the songs. 

This episode was characteristic of his perpetual suspiciousness. He 
closed his mind against the truth, but thought he could draw important 
conclusions from such random observations. Consequently he was always 
querying subordinates, even though they could not possibly have a view 
of the whole. Such distrust, usually without basis, had become a strong 
component in Hitlers character. It caused him to become obsessed with 
trivialities. Undoubtedly it was also to blame for his isolation from the 
events and the mood at the front; for his entourage tried as far as 
possible to fend off any informants who might stir up his suspicions 
that all was not well with the army in the east. 

When I finally left Hitler at three o'clock in the morning, I sent 
word that I would not be flying with Dr. Todt. The plane was to start 
five hours later, I was worn out and wanted only to have a decent sleep. 
In my small bedroom I considered— who in Hitler's entourage did not 
do so after a two-hour conversation with him?— what impression I had 
probably left with him. I was content, my confidence restored that we 
would be able to carry out our building projects, a matter I had begun 

* Todt was flying to Munich and expected to make a stopover in Berlin. 



193 ) Start in My New Office 

to doubt in view of the military situation. That night our dreams were 
transformed into realities; we had once again worked ourselves up to 
a hallucinatory optimism. 

Next morning, the shrill clang of the telephone startled me out of 
a deep sleep. Dr. Brandt reported excitedly: "Dr. Todt's plane has just 
crashed, and he has been killed. ,, 

From that moment on my whole world was changed. 

My relationship to Dr. Todt had become perceptibly closer in re- 
cent years. With his death I felt that I had lost an older, prudent col- 
league. We had much in common. Both of us came from prosperous, 
upper-middle-class circumstances; both of us were Badeners and had 
technological backgrounds. We loved nature, life in alpine shelters, ski 
tours— and shared a strong dislike for Bormann. Todt had repeatedly 
had serious run-ins with Bormann, protesting against his despoiling the 
landscape around Obersalzberg. My wife and I had frequently been 
Todt's house guests; the Todts lived in a small unpretentious place off 
the beaten track on Hintersee near Berchtesgaden. No one would have 
guessed that the famous road builder and creator of the autobahns lived 
there. 

Dr. Todt was one of the very few modest, unassertive personalities 
in the government, a man you could rely on, and who steered clear of 
all the intrigues. With his combination of sensitivity and matter-of- 
factness, such as is frequently found in technicians, he fitted rather 
poorly into the governing class of the National Socialist state. He lived 
a quiet, withdrawn life, having no personal contacts with party circles 
—and even very rarely appeared at Hitler's dinners and suppers, although 
he would have been welcome. This retiring attitude enhanced his pres- 
tige; whenever he did appear he became the center of interest. Hitler, 
too, paid him and his accomplishments a respect bordering on reverence. 
Nevertheless, Todt had maintained his personal independence in his 
relations with Hitler, although he was a loyal party member of the early 
years. 

In January 1941, when I was having difficulties with Bormann and 
Giessler, Todt wrote me an unusually candid letter which revealed his 
own resigned approach to the working methods of the National Socialist 
leadership: 

Perhaps my own experiences and bitter disappointments with all the 
men with whom I should actually be cooperating might be of help to you, 
enabling you to regard your experience as conditioned by the times, and 
perhaps the point of view which I have gradually arrived at after much 
struggle might somewhat help you psychologically. For I have concluded 
that in the course of such events . . . every activity meets with opposition, 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 194 

everyone who acts has his rivals and unfortunately his opponents also. But 
not because people want to be opponents, rather because the tasks and rela- 
tionships force different people to take different points of view. Perhaps, 
being young, you have quickly discovered how to cut through all such bother, 
while I only brood over it. 1 

At the breakfast table in the Fuehrer s headquarters there was lively 
discussion of whp could possibly be considered for Dr. Todt's successor. 
Everyone agreed that he was irreplaceable. For he had held the posi- 
tions of three ministers. Thus, he had been the supreme head of all road- 
building operations, in charge of all navigable waterways and improve- 
ments on them, as well as of all power plants. In addition, as Hitler s 
direct envoy, he was Minister of Armaments and Munitions. Within the 
framework of Goering's Four- Year Plan he headed the construction in- 
dustry and had also created the Todt Organization which was building 
the West Wall and the U-boat shelters along the Atlantic, as well as the 
roads in the occupied territories all the way from northern Norway to 
southern France. Now he was also responsible for road building in 
Russia. 

Thus in the course of the past several years Todt had gathered the 
major technical tasks of the Reich into his own hands. For the time being 
his operations were still nominally divided into various offices, but in 
essence he had set up the future technical ministry— all the more so 
since he was entrusted, within the party organization, with the Head 
Office for Technology, whose scope included all technical societies and 
associations. 

During these first few hours I had already realized that an important 
portion of Todt's widely ranging tasks would surely fall to me. For 
as early as the spring of 1939, on one of his inspection tours of the West 
Wall, Hitler had remarked that if anything should happen to Todt, I 
would be the man to carry out his construction assignments. Later, in the 
summer of 1940, Hitler received me officially in the Chancellery office 
to inform me that Todt was overburdened. He had therefore decided, 
he said, to put me in charge of all construction, including the fortifica- 
tions along the Atlantic. At the time I had been able to convince Hitler 
that it would be better if construction and armaments remained in one 
hand, since they were closely linked. Hitler had not referred to the 
matter again, and I had not spoken to anyone about it. The arrangement 
would not only have offended Todt but would surely have diminished 
his prestige. 2 

I was therefore prepared for some such assignment when I was 
summoned to Hitler as the first caller of the day at the usual late hour, 
around one o'clock in the afternoon. Even the face of Chief Adjutant 
Schaub expressed the importance of the occasion. In contrast to the 



195 ) Star t in M y New Office 

night before, Hitler received me officially as Fuehrer of the Reich. 
Standing, earnest and formal, he received my condolences, replied very 
briefly, then said without more ado: "Herr Speer, I appoint you the 
successor to Minister Todt in all his capacities." 

I was thunderstruck. He was already shaking hands with me and on 
the point of dismissing me. But I thought he had expressed himself im- 
precisely and therefore replied that I would try my best to be an adequate 
replacement for Dr. Todt in his construction assignments. "No, in all his 
capacities, including that of Minister of Armaments," Hitler corrected me. 

"But I don't know anything about ..." I protested. 

"I have confidence in you. I know you will manage it," Hitler cut 
me off. "Besides, I have no one else. Get in touch with the Ministry at 
once and take over!" 

"Then, mein Fiihrer, you must put that as a command, for I cannot 
vouch for my ability to master this assignment." 

Tersely, Hitler issued the command. I received it in silence. 

Without a personal word, such as had been the usual thing between 
us, Hitler turned to other business. I took my leave, having experienced 
a first sample of our new relationship. Hitherto, Hitler had displayed 
a kind of fellowship toward me as an architect. Now a new phase was 
perceptibly beginning. From the first moment on he was establishing 
the aloofness of an official relationship to a minister who was his 
subordinate. 

As I turned to the door, Schaub entered. "The Reich Marshal is 
here and urgently wishes to speak to you, mein Fiihrer. He has no 
appointment." 

Hitler looked sulky and displeased. "Send him in." He turned to 
me. "Stay here a moment longer." 

Goering bustled in and after a few words of condolence stated his 
mind: "Best if I take over Dr. Todt's assignments within the framework 
of the Four- Year Plan. This would avoid the frictions and difficulties we 
had in the past as a result of overlapping responsibilities." 

Goering had presumably come in his special train from his hunting 
lodge in Rominten, about sixty miles from Hitler's headquarters. Since 
the accident had taken place at half past nine he must have wasted no 
time at all. 

Hitler ignored Goering's proposal. "I have already appointed Todt's 
successor. Reich Minister Speer here has assumed all of Dr. Todt's 
offices as of this moment." 

The statement was so unequivocal that it excluded all possible 
argument. Goering seemed stunned and alarmed. But within a few 
seconds he recovered his composure. Coldly and ill-humoredly, he made 
no comment on Hitler's announcement. Instead he said: "I hope you 
will understand, mein Fiihrer, if I do not attend Dr. Todt's funeral. You 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 196 

know what battles I had with him. It would hardly do for me to be 
present/' 

I no longer remember precisely what Hitler replied, since all this 
washing of dirty linen was naturally somewhat of a shock to me at this 
early moment in my new ministerial career. But I recall that Goering 
finally consented to come to the funeral, so that his disagreements with 
Todt would not become public knowledge. Given the importance assigned 
to such ceremonies by the system, it would have caused quite a stir if 
the second man in the state was absent from a formal act of state in 
honor of a dead cabinet minister. 

There could be no doubt that Goering had tried to win his point 
by a surprise assault. I even surmised that Hitler had expected such a 
maneuver, and that this was the reason for the speed of my appointment. 

As Minister of Armaments, Dr. Todt could carry out his assignment 
from Hitler only by issuing direct orders to industry. Goering, on the 
other hand, as Commissioner of the Four- Year Plan, felt responsible 
for running the entire war economy. He and his apparatus were therefore 
pitted against Todt's activities. In the middle of January 1942, about 
two weeks before his death, Todt had taken part in a conference on pro- 
duction matters. In the course of it Goering had so berated him that 
Todt informed Funk on the same afternoon that he would have to quit. 
On such occasions it worked to Todt's disadvantage that he wore the 
uniform of a brigadier general of the air force. This meant that in spite 
of his ministerial office he ranked as Goering's subordinate in the 
military hierarchy. 

After this little episode one thing was clear to me: Goering would 
not be my ally, but Hitler seemed prepared to back me if I should 
encounter difficulties with the Reich Marshal. 

At first Hitler seemed to treat Todt's death with the stoic calm 
of a man who must reckon with such incidents as part of the general 
picture. Without citing any evidence, he expressed the suspicion, during 
the first few days, that foul play might have been involved and that 
he was going to have the secret service look into the matter. This view, 
however, soon gave way to an irritable and often distinctly nervous 
reaction whenever the subject was mentioned in his presence. In such 
cases Hitler might declare sharply: "I want to hear no more about that. 
I forbid further discussion of the subject." Sometimes he would add: 
"You know that this loss still affects me too deeply for me to want to 
talk about it." 

On Hitlers orders the Reich Air Ministry tried to determine 
whether sabotage might have been responsible for the plane crash. 
The investigation established the fact that the plane had exploded, with 
a sharp flame darting straight upward, some sixty-five feet above the 
ground. The report of the commission, which because of its importance 



197 ) Star* in My New Office 

was headed by an air force lieutenant general, nevertheless concluded 
with the curious statement: "The possibility of sabotage is ruled out 
Further measures are therefore neither requisite nor intended."* Inci- 
dentally, not long before his death Dr. Todt had deposited a sizable 
sum of money in a safe, earmarked for his personal secretary of many 
years service. He had remarked that he was doing this in case something 
should happen to him. 

One can only wonder at the recklessness and the frivolity with 
which Hitler appointed me to one of those three or four ministries on 
which the existence of his state depended. I was a complete outsider to 
the army, to the party, and to industry. Never in my life had I had 
anything to do with military weapons, for I had never been a soldier 
and up to the time of my appointment had never even used a rifle as a 
hunter. To be sure, it was in keeping with Hitler's dilettantism that 
he preferred to choose nonspecialists as his associates. After all, he had 
already appointed a wine salesman as his Foreign Minister, his party 
philosopher as his Minister for Eastern Affairs, and an erstwhile fighter 
pilot as overseer of the entire economy. Now he was picking an architect 
of all people to be his Minister of Armaments. Undoubtedly Hitler pre- 
ferred to fill positions of leadership with laymen. All his life he re- 
spected but distrusted professionals such as, for example, Schacht. 

As after the death of Professor Troost, my career was again being 
furthered by the death of another man. Hitler regarded it as a specially 
striking instance of Providence that I had arrived at headquarters the 
night before by sheer chance, and that I had canceled my projected flight 
with Todt. Later, when I was having my first successes, he liked to say 

* The plane executed a normal takeoff, but while still within sight of the airport 
the pilot made a rapid turn which suggested that he was trying for an emergency 
landing. As he was coming down he steered for the landing strip without taking time 
to head into the wind. The accident occurred near the airport and at a low altitude. 
The plane was a Heinkel III, converted for passenger flight; it had been lent to Dr. 
Todt by his friend Field Marshal Sperrle, since Todt's own plane was undergoing 
repairs. Hitler reasoned that this Heinkel, like all the courier planes that were used 
at the front, had a self-destruct mechanism on board. It could be activated by pulling 
a handle located between the pilot's and the copilot's seats, whereupon the plane 
would explode within a few minutes. The final report of the military tribunal, dated 
March 8, 1943 (K 1 T.L. II/42) and signed by the commanding general and the 
commander of Air District I, Konigsberg, stated: "Approximately twenty-three hun- 
dred feet from the airport and the end of the runway the pilot apparently throttled 
down, then opened the throttle again two or three seconds later. At that moment a 
long flame shot up vertically from the front of the plane, apparently caused by an 
explosion. The aircraft fell at once from an altitude of approximately sixty-five feet, 
pivoting around its right wing and hitting the ground almost perpendicularly, facing 
directly away from its flight direction. It caught fire at once and a series of explosions 
totally demolished it." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 198 

that the plane crash had been engineered by fate in order to bring about 
an increase in armaments production. 

In contrast to the troublesome Dr. Todt, Hitler must have found 
me a rather willing tool at first. To that extent, this shift in personnel 
obeyed the principle of negative selection which governed the composition 
of Hitler s entourage. Since he regularly responded to opposition by 
choosing someone more amenable, over the years he assembled around 
himself a group of associates who more and more surrendered to his argu- 
ments and translated them into action more and more unscrupulously. 

Nowadays, historians are apt to inquire into my activities as Arma- 
ments Minister and inclined to treat my building plans for Berlin and 
Nuremberg as of secondary importance. For me, however, my work as 
architect still remained my life task. I regarded my surprising appointment 
as an interim thing for the "duration," a form of wartime service. I saw 
the possibility of winning a reputation, and even fame, as Hitler s 
architect, whereas whatever even a prominent minister could accomplish 
would necessarily be absorbed in Hitler's glory. I therefore very soon 
extracted the promise from Hitler that he appoint me his architect again 
after the war. 3 The fact that I thought this necessary shows how de- 
pendent we all felt on Hitler s will, even in his most personal decisions. 
Hitler met my request without hesitation. He too thought that I would 
perform my most valuable services for him and his Reich as his foremost 
architect. When on occasion he spoke of his plans for the future, he 
frequently declared longingly: "Then both of us will withdraw from 
affairs for several months to go through all the building plans once 
more." But soon such remarks became rarer and rarer. 

The first result of my appointment as a minister was the arrival 
by plane at the Fuehrer s headquarters of Oberregierungsrat Konrad 
Haasemann, Todt's personal assistant. There were more influential and 
more important associates of Todt. I was therefore vexed and interpreted 
the dispatch of Haasemann as an attempt to test my authority. Haase- 
mann claimed that he had come to brief me on the qualities of my future 
associates. I told him sharply that I intended to form my own view. That 
same evening I took the night train to Berlin. For the time being I had 
lost any fondness I may have had for plane travel. 

Next morning as I rode through the suburbs of the capital with 
their factories and railroad yards, I was overcome by anxiety. How 
would I be able to contend with this vast and alien field, I wondered. 
I had considerable doubts about my qualifications for this new task, 
for coping with either the practical difficulties or the personal demands 
that were made upon a minister. As the train pulled into the Schlesischer 
Station, I f ound my heart pounding and felt weak. 

Here I was about to occupy a key position in the wartime organiza- 



199 ) Start in My New Office 

tion, although I was rather shy in dealing with strangers, lacked the gift 
of speaking up easily at public meetings, and even in conferences found 
it hard to express my thoughts precisely and understandably. What would 
the generals of the army say when I, already marked as a nonsoldier 
and artist, was presented to them as their colleague? Actually, such ques- 
tions of personal impression and of the extent of my authority worried 
me as much as the practical tasks. 

A rather considerable problem awaited me in dealing with the 
administrative aspect of my new job. I was aware that Todt's old 
associates would regard me as an intruder. They knew me, of course, 
as a friend of their chief, but they also knew me as someone always 
petitioning them for supplies of building materials. And these men had 
been in close collaboration with Dr. Todt for many years. 

Immediately after my arrival I paid a visit to all the important 
department heads in their offices, thus sparing them the necessity of 
coming to me to report. I also gave the order that nothing was to be 
changed in Dr. Todt's private office, although its furnishings did not 
suit my taste.* 

On the morning of February 11, 1942, I had to be present at 
Anhalter Station to receive the coffin with Todt's remains. This 
ceremony was hard on my nerves, as was the funeral on the next day 
in my mosaic hall in the Chancellery— in the presence of a Hitler moved 
to tears. During the simple ceremony at the grave Xaver Dorsch, one 
of Todt's key men, solemnly assured me of his loyalty. Two years later, 
when I fell seriously ill, he entered into an intrigue against me led by 
Goering. 

My work began immediately. Field Marshal Erhard Milch, state 
secretary of the Air Ministry, invited me to a conference in the great 
hall of the Ministry, to be held on Friday, February 13, at which 
armament questions were to be discussed with the three branches of the 
services and with representatives of industry. When I asked whether 
this conference could not be postponed, since I first had to get the 
feel of my job, Milch replied with a counterquestion typical of his 
free and easy manner and the good relations between us: The top 
industrialists from all over the Reich were already on their way to the 
conference, and was I going to beg off? I agreed to come. 

On the day before, I was summoned to Goering. This was my first 

Not until the summer of 1943, when I moved, was I able to get rid of these 
ugly furnishings unobtrusively and replace them with furniture I had designed for 
my old study. In the process I also succeeded in parting company with a picture 
that had previously hung over my desk. It showed Hitler, who was hopeless on horse- 
back, staring sternly from the saddle and decked out as a medieval knight with a 
lance. . . . Sensitive technicians do not always show the best taste in their interior 
decoration. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 200 

visit to him in my new capacity of minister. Cordially, he spoke of the 
harmony between us while I was his architect. He hoped this would 
not change, he said. When Goering wanted to, he could display a good 
deal of charm, hard to resist if somewhat condescending. But then he 
came down to business. He had had a written agreement with my 
predecessor, he said. A similar document had been prepared for me; he 
would send it to me for my signature. The agreement stipulated that in 
my procurement for the army I could not infringe on areas covered by 
the Four- Year Plan. He concluded our discussion by saying rather 
obscurely that I would learn more in the course of the conference with 
Milch and the others. I did not reply and ended the discussion on the 
same note of cordiality. Since the Four- Year Plan embraced the entire 
economy, I would have had my hands completely tied if I abided by 
Goering's arrangement. 

I sensed that something unusual was awaiting me at Milch's 
conference. Since I still felt by no means secure and since Hitler was 
still in Berlin, I informed him of my anxieties. I knew, from the little 
episode with Goering at the time of my appointment, that I could 
count on his backing. "Very well," he said. "If any steps are taken 
against you, or if you have difficulties, interrupt the conference and 
invite the participants to the Cabinet Room. Then 111 tell those 
gentlemen whatever is necessary ." 

The Cabinet Room was regarded as a "sacred place"; to be received 
there would inevitably make a deep impression. And the fact that Hitler 
would be willing to address this group, with whom I would be dealing 
in the future, offered me the best possible prospects for my start. 

The large conference hall of the Air Ministry was filled. There 
were thirty persons present: the most important men in industry, 
among them General Manager Albert Vogler; Wilhelm Zangen, head of 
the German Industry Association; General Ernst Fromm, chief of the 
Reserve Army, with his subordinate, Lieutenant General Leeb, chief of 
the army Ordnance Office; Admiral Witzell, armaments chief of the 
navy; General Thomas, chief of the War Economy and Armaments 
Office of the OKW; Walther Funk, Reich Minister of Economics; various 
officials of the Four-Year Plan; and a few more of Goering's important 
associates. Milch took the chair as representative of the conference host. 
He asked Funk to sit at his right and me at his left. In a terse introductory 
address he explained the difficulties that had arisen in armaments 
production due to the conflicting demands of the three services. Vogler 
of the United Steel Works followed with some highly intelligent ex- 
planations of how orders and counterorders, disputes over priority levels, 
and constant shifting of priorities interfered with industrial production. 
There were still unused reserves available, he said, but because of the 
tugging and hauling these did not come to light. Thus it was high 



201 ) Start in My New Office 

time to establish clear relationships. There must be one man able to 
make all decisions. Industry did not care who it was. 

Thereafter, General Fromm spoke for the army and Admiral Witzell 
for the navy. In spite of some reservations they expressed general 
agreement with Vogler s remarks. The other participants likewise were 
convinced of the necessity for having one person to assume authority 
in economic matters. During my own work for the air force I too had 
recognized the urgency of this matter. 

Finally Economics Minister Funk stood up and turned directly 
to Milch. We were all in essential agreement, he said; the course of the 
meeting had revealed that. The only remaining question, therefore, was 
who the man should be. "Who would be better suited for the purpose than 
you, my dear Milch, since you have the confidence of Goering, our 
revered Reich Marshal? I therefore believe I am speaking in the name 
of all when I ask you to take over this office!" he exclaimed, striking a 
rather overemotional note for the occasion. 

This had clearly been prearranged. Even while Funk was speaking, 
I whispered into Milch's ear: "The conference is to be continued in 
the Cabinet Room. The Fuehrer wants to speak about my tasks." Milch, 
quick-wittedly grasping the meaning of this, replied to Funk's proposal 
that he was greatly honored by such an expression of confidence, but 
that he could not accept. 4 

I spoke up for the first time, transmitting to the assembled group the 
Fuehrers invitation and announcing that the discussion would be con- 
tinued on Thursday, February 18, in my ministry, since it would probably 
deal with my assignment. Milch then adjourned the session. 

Later Funk admitted to me that on the eve of the conference Billy 
Korner, Goering's state secretary and associate in the work of the 
Four- Year Plan, had urged him to propose Milch as the authority for 
final decisions. Funk took it for granted that Korner could not have made 
this request without Goering's knowledge. 

Hitler s invitation alone must have made it clear to those familiar 
with the balance of power that I was starting from a stronger position 
than my predecessor had ever possessed. 

Now Hitler had to make good on his promise. In his office he let 
me brief him on what had taken place and jotted down some notes. He 
then went into the Cabinet Room with me and immediately took the 
floor. 

Hitler spoke for about an hour. Rather tediously, he expatiated on 
the tasks of war industry, emphasized the need for accelerated produc- 
tion, spoke of the valuable forces that must be mobilized in industry, 
and was astonishingly candid on the subject of Goering: "This man can- 
not look after armaments within the framework of the Four- Year Plan." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 202 

It was essential, Hitler continued, to separate this task from the Four- 
Year Plan and turn it over to me. A function was given to a man and 
then taken from him again; such things happened. The capacity for in- 
creased production was available, but things had been mismanaged. 

(In prison Funk told me that Goering had asked for this statement 
of Hitlers— which amounted to stripping him of some of his powers— in 
writing so that he could use it as evidence against his use of forced 
labor.) 

Hitler avoided touching on the problem of a single head for all 
armaments production. Similarly, he spoke only of supplies for the 
army and navy, deliberately excluding the air force. I too had glossed 
over this contested point in my words with him, since the matter involved 
a political decision and would have brought in all sorts of ambiguities. 
Hitler concluded his address with an appeal to the participants. He 
first described my great feats in construction— which could scarcely 
have made much of an impression on these people. He went on to say 
that this new job represented a great sacrifice on my part— a statement 
which did not have much meaning in view of the critical situation. He 
expected not only cooperation on their part but also fair treatment. 
"Behave toward him like gentlemen!" he said, employing the English 
word, which he rarely used. What exactly my assignment was, he did 
not clearly state, and I preferred it that way. 

Heretofore Hitler had never introduced a minister in this way. Even 
in a less authoritarian system such a debut would have been of assist- 
ance. In our state the consequences were astonishing, even to me. For a 
considerable time I found myself moving in a kind of vacuum that 
offered no resistance whatsoever. Within the widest limits I could 
practically do as I pleased. 

Funk, who then walked Hitler back to his apartment in the 
Chancellery along with me, promised emotionally on the way that he 
would place everything at my disposal and do all in his power to help 
me. Moreover he kept the promise, with minor exceptions. 

Bormann and I stood chatting with Hitler in the salon for a few 
minutes longer. Before Hitler withdrew to his upstairs rooms, he once 
again recommended that I avail myself of industry as far as possible, 
since I would find the most valuable assistants there. This idea was 
not new to me, for Hitler had in the past often emphasized that one 
did best to let industry handle major tasks directly, for government 
bureaucracy only hampered initiative— this aversion to bureaucrats 
remained a standing point with him. I took this favorable moment with 
Bormann present to assure him that I would indeed be drawing chiefly 
on technicians from industry. But there would have to be no questions 
raised as to their party membership, since many of them kept aloof 
from the party, as was well known. Hitler agreed; he instructed 



203 ) Start in My New Office 

Bormann to go along with this; and so my ministry was— at least until 
the attempted assassination of July 20, 1944— spared the unpleasant prob- 
ings of Bormann s party secretariat. 

That same evening I had a full discussion with Milch, who pledged 
an end to that rivalry the air force had hitherto practiced toward the 
army and navy in matters of procurement. Especially during the early 
months his advice became indispensable; out of our official relationship 
there grew a cordial friendship which has lasted to the present. 



Organized Improvisation 



I HAD FIVE DAYS BEFORE THE CONFERENCE IN MY MINISTRY. BY THEN I 

would have to have some plan of action. Surprising though it may seem, 
the principles were clear to me from the start. From the first day on 
I headed, with a sleepwalkers sureness, toward the one system that 
could possibly achieve success in armaments production. Of cqurse I 
had a certain advantage, for during my two years of construction work 
for the armaments industry on a lower plane I had caught glimpses of 
"many fundamental errors which would have remained hidden from me 
if I had been at the top." 1 

I prepared a plan of organization whose vertical lines represented 
individual items, such as tanks, planes, or submarines. In other words, 
the armaments for the three branches of the service were included. These 
vertical columns were enclosed in numerous rings, each of which was to 
stand for a group of components needed for all guns, tanks, planes, and 
other armaments. Within these rings I considered, for example, the pro- 
duction of forgings or ball bearings or electrical equipment as a whole. 
Accustomed as an architect to three-dimensional thinking, I drew this 
new organizational scheme in perspective. 

On February 18 the top figures in war industry and in the govern- 
ment bureaus having to do with armaments met once again, in the former 
conference room of the Academy of Arts. After I had spoken for an hour, 
they accepted my organizational scheme without cavil and gave their 

( 204 ) 



2°5 ) Organized Improvisation 

endorsement to a statement reviewing the demands for unitary leadership 
made at the February 13 conference and announcing that I was herewith 
being given a mandate for full authority. I prepared to pass this paper 
around the table for signature— a most unusual procedure in relations 
among government boards. 

Hitler's injunctions had had their effect. Milch was the first to de- 
clare himself in full agreement with the proposal and signed the paper 
without more ado. Some of the other participants raised formal objec- 
tions, but Milch used his authority to override them. Only Admiral 
Witzell, the representative of the navy, continued his opposition to the 
last and finally gave his consent only under protest. 

Next day, February 19, I went to the Fuehrers headquarters ac- 
companied by Field Marshal Milch, General Thomas, and General 
Olbricht (as General Fromm's representative) to present my organiza- 
tional plans to Hitler and report to him on the results of the conference. 
Hitler approved of all I had done. 

Immediately after my return Goering summoned me to his hunting 
lodge, Karinhall, more than forty-five miles north of Berlin. After 
Goering had seen Hitlers new Berghof in 1935, he had had his modest 
old hunting lodge rebuilt into a manor that exceeded Hitler's in size. 
The salon was just as large as Hitler s, but with an even bigger picture 
window. At the time Hitler was annoyed by this pomp. But it must be ad- 
mitted that Goering's architect had created a suitable frame for Goering's 
craving for magnificence. It now served as his headquarters. 

Such conferences usually meant the loss of a valuable working 
day. This time, too, when I arrived punctually toward eleven o'clock 
after a long automobile ride, I spent an hour in Goering's reception 
hall looking at pictures and tapestries. For in contrast to Hitler, Goering 
took a large view of the appointed time. Finally he emerged from his 
private apartment on the upper floor, dressed in a flowing green-velvet 
dressing gown, a picturesque note, and descended the stairs. We greeted 
each other rather coolly. With tripping steps he preceded me into his 
office and took his seat at a gigantic desk. I modestly sat down facing 
him. Goering was extremely angry; he complained bitterly that I had not 
invited him to the conference in the Cabinet Room and pushed toward me 
across the vast expanses of the desk an opinion by Erich Neumann, his 
ministerial director for the Four- Year Plan, on the legal implications of 
my own paper. With an agility I would not have thought so fat a man 
capable of, he leaped to his feet and began pacing the big room, frantic 
with agitation. His deputies were all spineless wretches, he declared. By 
giving their signatures they had made themselves my underlings for all 
time to come, and this without even asking him. Of course, this bluster 
was directed against me as well; but the fact that he did not dare storm 
at me signified a weakened position. He could not accept such nibbling 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 206 

away at his power, he declared in conclusion. He would go to Hitler 
at once and resign his office as boss of the Four-Year Plan. 2 

At the time such a resignation would certainly have been no loss. 
For although at the start Goering had pushed the Four- Year Plan with 
great energy, by 1942 he was generally regarded as sluggish and distinctly 
averse to work. Increasingly, he gave an impression of instability; he 
took up too many ideas, changed course all the time, and was consistently 
unrealistic. 

Hitler would probably not have permitted Goering to resign because 
of the political backlash. Instead, he would have sought a compromise. 
I saw that this was something I had to head off, for Hitlers compromises 
were merely evasions and of a sort everyone in the government feared. 
They did not eliminate difficulties but instead made all administrative 
interrelationships more opaque and complicated. 

I knew that I had to do something to build up Goering's prestige. 
For the time being, I assured him that the new arrangement desired by 
Hitler and approved by the representatives of industry and the services 
would in no way infringe on his position as head of the Four- Year Plan. 
At this, Goering seemed mollified. I went on to say that I was ready to 
become his subordinate and carry out my work within the framework of 
the Four-Year Plan. 

Three days later I called on Goering again and showed him a draft 
agreement appointing me "Chief Representative for Armaments within 
the Four- Year Plan." Goering seemed satisfied, although he pointed out 
that I had undertaken much too much and would be wiser to limit my 
goals. Two days later, on March 1, 1942, he signed the decree. It author- 
ized me "to give armaments . . . within the whole of the economy the 
priority which is appropriate for them in wartime. ,,3 This was more power 
than had been given me by the document of February 18, which Goering 
had been so furious about. 

On March 16, shortly after Hitler had approved the matter— he was 
glad to be relieved of all personal difficulties with Goering— I informed 
the German press of my appointment. To make my point more vividly, I 
had dug up an old photograph showing Goering, delighted with my 
design for his Reich Marshal's office building, clapping his hands on my 
shoulders. This was supposed to show that the crisis, which had begun 
to be talked about in Berlin, was now over. However, there was a protest 
from Goering's press agency: I was told that the photo and the decree 
should by rights have been released by Goering alone. 

There were more problems of this sort. His sensitivities aroused, 
Goering complained of having heard from the Italian Ambassador that 
the foreign press was intimating that he had been downgraded. Such re- 
ports were bound to undermine his prestige in industry, he protested. 
Now it was an open secret that Goering's high style of living was financed 
by industry, and I had the feeling that he feared a reduction in his pres- 



207 ) Organized Improvisation 

tige would result in a reduction in these subsidies. I therefore suggested 
that he invite the chief industrialists to a conference in Berlin, in the 
course of which I would declare formally my subordination to him. This 
proposal gratified him enormously; his good humor returned instantly. 

Goering thereupon ordered some fifty industrialists to come to Berlin. 
The conference began with a very brief address by me, saying what I 
had promised, while Goering delivered a long discourse on the importance 
of armaments. He exorted all those present to make the maximum effort, 
and other such commonplaces. On the other hand he did not mention 
my assignment in either a favorable or an unfavorable sense. Thereafter, 
thanks to Goering's lethargy, I was able to work freely and unhampered. 
No doubt he was often jealous of my successes with Hitler; but during 
the next two years he scarcely ever tried to interfere with anything I was 
doing. 

Goering's own powers seemed to me, given his now reduced au- 
thority, not quite sufficient for my own work. Soon afterward, therefore 
—on March 21— I had Hitler sign another decree: "The requirements of 
the German economy as a whole must be subordinated to the necessities 
of armaments production." Given the usages of the authoritarian system, 
this decree of Hitlers amounted to dictatorial powers over the economy. 

The constitutional forms of our organization were just as improvised 
and vague as all these arrangements. There was no precise statement of 
my assignments or jurisdiction. My feeling was that I was better off 
without such definitions. I did my best to keep the situation fluid. Con- 
sequently, we were able to determine our jurisdiction from case to case, 
depending on need and the impetuosity of my associates. A legalistic 
formulation of our rights, which given Hitlers favorable attitude toward 
me could have been used to acquire a position of almost unlimited power, 
would only have led to jurisdictional disputes with other ministries. It 
would not have achieved our purpose, which was to have everyone pull 
together satisfactorily. 

These vaguenesses were a cancer in Hitler s mode of governing. But 
I was in accord with the system as long as it permitted me to function 
effectively and as long as Hitler signed all the decrees that I presented 
to him for signature. But when he no longer blindly granted my requests 
—and in certain areas he soon stopped doing so— I was condemned to 
either impotence or cunning. 

On the evening of March 2, 1942, about a month after my appoint- 
ment, I invited the architects employed on the rebuilding of Berlin to a 
farewell dinner at Horcher s. The very thing you have forcibly resisted, 
I said to them in a brief address, sooner or later overpowers you. I found 
it strange that my new work was not so alien, although at first sight it 
seemed so remote from what I had previously done. "I have known since 
my university days," I continued, "that if we wish to understand every- 
thing, we must do one thing thoroughly. I have therefore decided to take 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 2(>8 

a keen interest in tanks for the moment, trusting that I thereby shall be 
better able to grasp the essence of many other tasks." As a cautious person, 
I said, I had for the time being drawn up my program for the next two 
years. I hoped, however, to be able to return to architecture sooner. My 
wartime assignment should prove of use later on, for we technicians would 
be called on to solve the problems of the future. "Moreover ," I concluded 
somewhat grandiosely, "in the future architects will take over the leader- 
ship in technology." 4 

Equipped with Hitlers grant of full authority, with a peaceable 
Goering in the background, I could go forward with my comprehensive 
plan of "industrial self -responsibility," as I had sketched it in my outline. 
Today it is generally agreed that the astonishingly rapid rise in arma- 
ments production was due to this plan. Its principles, however, were not 
new. Both Field Marshal Milch and my predecessor Todt had already 
adopted the procedure of entrusting eminent technicians from leading 
industrial firms with the management of separate areas of armaments 
production. But Dr. Todt himself had borrowed this idea. The real creator 
of the concept of industrial self -responsibility was Walther Rathenau, the 
great Jewish organizer of the German economy during the First World 
War. He realized that considerable increases in production could be 
achieved by exchange of technical experiences, by division of labor from 
plant to plant, and by standardization. As early as 1917 he declared that 
such methods could guarantee "a doubling of production with no increase 
in equipment and no increase in labor costs." 5 On the top floor of Todt's 
Ministry sat one of Rathenaus old assistants who had been active in his 
raw materials organization during the First World War and had later 
written a memorandum on its structure. Dr. Todt benefited by his advice. 

We formed "directive committees" for the various types of weapons 
and "directive pools" for the allocation of supplies. Thirteen such com- 
mittees were finally established, one for each category of my armaments 
program. Linking these were an equal number of pools. 6 

Alongside these committees and pools I set up development com- 
missions in which army officers met with the best designers in industry. 
These commissions were to supervise new products, suggest improve- 
ments in manufacturing techniques even during the design stage, and 
call a halt to any unnecessary projects. 

The heads of the committees and the pools were to make sure— this 
was vital to our whole approach— that a given plant concentrated on pro- 
ducing only one item, but did so in maximum quantity. Because of Hitler s 
and Goering's continual restiveness, expressed in sudden shifts of pro- 
gram, the factories had hitherto tried to assure themselves of four or five 
different contracts simultaneously, and if possible, from different branches 
of the services, so that they could shift to alternative contracts in case of 
sudden cancellations. Moreover, the Wehrmacht frequently assigned con- 



209 ) Organized Improvisation 

tracts only for a limited time. Thus, for example, before 1942 the manu- 
facture of ammunition was checked or increased depending on consump- 
tion, which came in sudden bursts because of the blitz campaigns. This 
state of affairs kept the factories from throwing all their productive energy 
into making ammunition. We provided contractual guarantees of con- 
tinued procurement and assigned the types we needed among the various 
factories. 

By dint of these changes, the armaments production of the early years 
of the war, which had been on a more or less piecework basis, was con- 
verted to industrial mass production. Amazing results were soon to show 
up; but significantly enough, not in those industries which had already 
been working along modern lines of efficiency, such as the automobile 
industry. These scarcely lent themselves to any increase in production. 
I regarded my task principally as one of tracking down and defining 
problems so far screened by long years of routine; but I left their solution 
to the specialists. Obsessed with my task, I did not try to keep down the 
extent of my responsibilities, but rather to take in more and more areas 
of the economy. Reverence for Hitler, a sense of duty, ambition, pride 
—all these elements were operative. After all, at thirty-six I was the 
youngest minister in the Reich. My Industry Organization soon com- 
prised more than ten thousand assistants and aides, but in our Ministry 
itself there were only two hundred and eighteen officials at work. 7 This 
proportion was in keeping with my view of the Ministry as merely a 
steering organization, with the chief thrust of our operation lying in "in- 
dustrial self -responsibility." 

The traditional arrangement provided that most matters would be 
submitted to the minister by his state secretary. The latter functioned 
as a kind of sieve, deciding the importance of things at his own discretion. 
I eliminated this procedure and made directly subordinate to myself more 
than thirty leaders of the Industry Organization and no less than ten 
department chiefs* in the Ministry. In principle they were all supposed 
to settle their interrelationships among themselves, but I took the liberty 

* All department heads under my direction were empowered to sign orders as 
"deputized by" the minister rather than "in behalf of" the minister. This was a tech- 
nical breach in the rules of the state bureaucracy, for it implied that they were 
authorized to act independently, a power usually reserved to state secretaries. I 
ignored the protests submitted by the Minister of the Interior, who was responsible 
for preserving the regular procedures of government administration. 

I brought the head of the Planning Department, Willy Liebel, from Nuremberg, 
where he had been mayor. The director of the Technical Department, Karl Saur, had 
risen from the intermediate ranks of party functionaries, after previously occupying 
a subordinate position in industry. The head of the Supply Department, Dr. Walter 
Schieber, was a chemist by profession; he was typical of the older party member in 
the SS and party who had had previous experience as specialists. Xaver Dorsch, my 
deputy in the Todt Organization, was our oldest party member. The head of the 
department responsible for consumer goods production, Seebauer, had also joined the 
party long before 1933. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 210 

of intervening in important questions or whenever differences of opinion 
arose. 

Our method of work was just as unusual as this form of organiza- 
tion. The old-line officials of the government bureaucracy spoke dis- 
dainfully of a "dynamic Ministry" or a "Ministry without an organization 
plan" and a "Ministry without officials." It was said that I applied rough- 
and-ready or "American" methods. My comment, "If jurisdictions are 
sharply separated, we are actually encouraging a limited point of view," 8 
was prompted by rebellion against the caste mentality of the system, but 
also bore some resemblance to Hitler s notions of improvised govern- 
ment by an impulsive genius. 

Another principle of mine also gave offense. This had to do with 
personnel policy. As soon as I assumed my post I gave instructions, as the 
Fuehrer s Minutes of February 19, 1942, record, that the leading men in 
important departments who were "over fifty-five years old must be 
assigned a deputy who is no older than forty." 

Whenever I explained my organizational plans to Hitler, he showed 
a striking lack of interest. I had the impression that he did not like to 
deal with these questions; indeed, in certain realms he was altogether 
incapable of distinguishing the important from the unimportant. He also 
did not like establishing clear lines of jurisdiction. Sometimes he de- 
liberately assigned bureaus or individuals the same or similar tasks. 
"That way," he used to say, "the stronger one does the job." 

Within half a year after my taking office we had significantly in- 
creased production in all the areas within our scope. Production in 
August 1942, according to the Index Figures for German Armaments 
End-Products, as compared with the February production, had increased 
by 27 percent for guns, by 25 percent for tanks, while ammunition pro- 
duction almost doubled, rising 97 percent. The total productivity in 
armaments increased by 59.6 percent. 9 Obviously we had mobilized 
reserves that had hitherto lain fallow. 

After two and a half years, in spite of the beginning of heavy bomb- 
ing, we had raised our entire armaments production from an average 
index figure of 98 for the year 1941 to a summit of 322 in July 1944. Dur- 
ing the same period the labor force expanded by only about 30 percent. 
We had succeeded in doubling the output of labor and had achieved the 
very results Rathenau had predicted in 1917 as the effect of efficiency: 
doubling production without increasing equipment or labor costs. 

It was not that any genius was at work here, though that has often 
been asserted. Many of the technicians in my office would undoubtedly 
have been more fit for the job, as far as knowledge of the fields involved 
is concerned. But none of them could have thrown the nimbus of Hitler 
into the balance as I could, and that made all the difference. The back- 
ing of the Fuehrer counted for everything. 



211 ) Organized Improvisation 

Aside from all organizational innovations, things went so well be- 
cause I applied the methods of democratic economic leadership. The 
democracies were on principle committed to placing trust in the re- 
sponsible businessmen as long as that trust was justified. Thus they re- 
warded initiative, aroused an awareness of mission, and spurred decision 
making. Among us, on the other hand, all such elements had long ago 
been buried. Pressure and coercion kept production going, to be sure, 
but destroyed all spontaneity. I felt it necessary to issue a declaration to 
the effect that industry was not "knowingly lying to us, stealing from us, 
or otherwise trying to damage our war economy." 10 

The party felt acutely challenged by that attitude, as I was to find 
out after July 20, 1944. Exposed to sharp attacks, I had to defend my 
system of delegated responsibility in a letter to Hitler. 11 

Paradoxically, from 1942 on, the developments in the warring coun- 
tries moved in an opposite direction. The Americans, for example, found 
themselves compelled to introduce an authoritarian stiffening into their 
industrial structure, whereas we tried to loosen the regimented economic 
system. The elimination of all criticism of superiors had in the course of 
years led to a situation in which mistakes and failures, misplanning, or 
duplication of effort were no longer even noted. I saw to the formation 
of committees in which discussion was possible, shortages and mistakes 
could be uncovered, and their elimination considered. We often joked 
that we were on the point of reintroducing the parliamentary system. 12 
Our new system had created one of the prerequisites for balancing out 
the weaknesses of every authoritarian order. Important matters were not 
to be regulated solely by the military principle, that is by channels of 
command from top to bottom. But for such "parliamentarism" to work, 
of course, the committees mentioned above had to be headed by persons 
who allowed arguments and counterarguments to be stated before they 
made a decision. 

Grotesquely enough, this system met with considerable reserve on 
the part of the factory heads. Early in my job I had sent out a circular 
letter asking them to inform me of their "fundamental needs and obser- 
vations on a larger scale then previously." I expected a flood of letters, 
but there was no response. At first I suspected my office staff of with- 
holding the mail from me. But actually none had come in. The factory 
heads, as I learned later, feared reprimands from the Gauleiters. 

There was more than enough criticism from above to below, but 
the necessary complement of criticism from below to above was hard to 
come by. I often had the feeling that I was hovering in the air, since my 
decisions produced no critical response. 

We owed the success of our programs to thousands of technicians 
with special achievements to their credit to whom we now entrusted 
the responsibility for whole segments of the armaments industry. This 
aroused their buried enthusiasm. They also took gladly to my unorthodox 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 212 

style of leadership. Basically, I exploited the phenomenon of the tech- 
nician's often blind devotion to his task. Because of what seems to be 
the moral neutrality of technology, these people were without any 
scruples about their activities. The more technical the world imposed on 
us by the war, the more dangerous was this indifference of the tech- 
nician to the direct consequences of his anonymous activities. 

In my work I preferred "uncomfortable associates to compliant 
tools." 13 The party, on the other hand, had a deep distrust for non- 
political specialists. Fritz Sauckel, always one of the most radical of the 
party leaders, once commented that if they had begun by shooting a few 
factory heads, the others would have reacted with better performances. 

For two years my position was unassailable. After the generals' 
putsch of July 20, 1944, Bormann, Goebbels, Ley, and Sauckel prepared 
to cut me down to size. I quickly appealed to Hitler in a letter stating 
that I did not feel strong enough to go on with my job if it were going 
to be subjected to political standards. 14 

The nonparty members of my Ministry enjoyed a legal protection 
highly unusual in Hitler's state. For over the objections of the Minister 
of Justice I had established the principle, right at the beginning of my 
job, that there would be no indictments for sabotage of armaments ex- 
cept on my motion. 15 This proviso protected my associates even after 
July 20, 1944. Ernst Kaltenbrunner, the Gestapo chief, wanted to indict 
three general managers, Biicher of the AEG electrical company, Vogler 
of the United Steel Works, and Reusch of the GutehoflEnungshiitte (the 
mining combine), for "defeatist" conversations. He came to me for au- 
thorization. I pointed out that the nature of our work compelled us to 
speak candidly about the situation and thus fended off the Gestapo. On 
the other hand, I applied severe penalties for abuse of our honor system 
—if, for example, someone furnished false data in order to hoard im- 
portant raw materials. For actions of this sort would result in the with- 
holding of arms from the front. 16 

From the first day on I considered our gigantic organization tem- 
porary. Just as I myself wanted to return to architecture after the war 
and had even asked Hitler for an assurance to that effect, I felt we had 
to promise the uneasy leaders of business that our system of organiza- 
tion was solely a war measure. In peacetime, industry could not be asked, 
I told them, to give up their best men or to share their knowledge with 
rival enterprises. 17 

Along with this, I also made an effort to preserve the style of im- 
provisation. The idea that bureaucratic methods were now taking root 
inside my own organization depressed me. Again and again I called upon 
my associates to cut down on record keeping, to make agreements in- 
formally in conversation and by means of telephone calls, and to eschew 



213 ) Organized Improvisation 

the multiplication of "transactions," as bureaucratic jargon called filling 
a file. Moreover, the bombing raids on German cities forced us to con- 
stant ingenuities. There were times when I actually regarded these raids 
as helpful— witness my ironic reaction to the destruction of the Ministry 
in the air raid of November 22, 1943: "Although we have been fortunate 
in that large parts of the current files of the Ministry have burned and 
so relieved us for a time of useless ballast, we cannot really expect that 
such events will continually introduce the necessary fresh air into our 
work/' 18 

In spite of this technical and industrial progress, even at the height 
of the military successes in 1940 and 1941 the level of armaments pro- 
duction of the First World War was not reached. During the first year 
of the war in Russia, production figures were only a fourth of what they 
had been in the autumn of 19x8. Three years later, in the spring of 1944, 
when we were nearing our production maximum, ammunition produc- 
tion still lagged behind that of the First World War— considering the 
total production of Germany at that time together with Austria and 
Czechoslovakia. 10 

Among the causes for this backwardness I always reckoned excessive 
bureaucratization, which I fought in vain. 20 For example, the size of the 
staff of the Ordnance Office was ten times what it had been during the 
First World War. The cry for simplification of administration rims 
through all my speeches and letters from 1942 to the end of 1944. The 
longer I fought the typically German bureaucracy, whose tendencies 
were aggravated by the authoritarian system, the more my criticism 
assumed a political cast. This matter became something of an obsession 
with me, for on the morning of July 20, 1944, a few hours before the 
attempted assassination, I wrote to Hitler that Americans and Russians 
knew how to act with organizationally simple methods and therefore 
achieved greater results, whereas we were hampered by superannuated 
forms of organization and therefore could not match the others' feats. 
The war, I said, was also a contest between two systems of organization, 
the "struggle of our system of overbred organization against the art of 
improvisation on the opposing side." If we did not arrive at a different 
system of organization, I continued, it would be evident to posterity that 
our outmoded, tradition-bound, and arthritic organizational system had 
lost the struggle. 



i6 

Sins of Omission 



It remains one of the oddities of this war that hitler demanded far 
less from his people 1 than Churchill and Roosevelt did from their re- 
spective nations. The discrepancy between the total mobilization of labor 
forces in democratic England and the casual treatment of this question 
in authoritarian Germany is proof of the regime's anxiety not to risk 
any shift in the popular mood. The German leaders were not disposed 
to make sacrifices themselves or to ask sacrifices of the people. They tried 
to keep the morale of the people in the best possible state by conces- 
sions. Hitler and the majority of his political followers belonged to the 
generation who as soldiers had witnessed the Revolution of November 
1918 and had never forgotten it. In private conversations Hitler indi- 
cated that after the experience of 1918 one could not be cautious enough. 
In order to anticipate any discontent, more effort and money was ex- 
pended on supplies of consumer goods, on military pensions or com- 
pensation to women for the loss of earnings by their men in the services, 
than in the countries with democratic governments. Whereas Churchill 
promised his people only blood, sweat, and tears, all we heard during 
the various phases and various crises of the war was Hitlers slogan: "The 
final victory is certain." This was a confession of political weakness. It 
betrayed great concern over a loss of popularity which might develop 
into an insurrectionary mood. 

Alarmed by the setbacks on the Russian front, in the spring of 1942 

( 214 ) 



215 ) Sow °f Omission 

I considered total mobilization of all auxiliary forces. What was more, 
I urged that "the war must be ended in the shortest possible time; if not, 
Germany will lose the war. We must win it by the end of October, before 
the Russian winter begins, or we have lost it once and for all. Conse- 
quently, we can only win with the weapons we have now, not with those 
we are going to have next year." In some inexplicable way this situation 
analysis came to the knowledge of The Times (London), which published 
it on September 7, 1942. 2 The Times article actually summed up the 
points on which Milch, Fromm, and I had agreed at the time. 

"Our feelings tell us that this year we are facing the decisive turning 
point in our history," I also declared publicly in April 1942, 3 without 
suspecting that the turning point was impending: with the encirclement 
of the Sixth Army in Stalingrad, the annihilation of the Africa Corps, the 
successful Allied land operations in North Africa, and the first massive 
air raids on German cities. We had also reached a turning point in our 
wartime economy; for until the autumn of 1941 the economic leader- 
ship had been basing its politics on short wars with long stretches of 
quiet in between. Now the permanent war was beginning. 

As I saw it, a mobilization of all reserves should have begun with 
the heads of the party hierarchy. This seemed all the more proper since 
Hitler himself had solemnly declared to the Reichstag on September 1, 
1939, that there would be no privations which he himself was not pre- 
pared to assume at once. 

In actual fact he at last agreed to suspend all the building projects 
he was still engaged on, including those at Obersalzberg. I cited this 
noble gesture of the Fuehrer's two weeks after entering office when I 
addressed the group that gave us the most difficulties, the assembled 
Gauleiters and Reichsleiters: "Consideration of future peacetime tasks 
must never be allowed to influence a decision. I have instructions from 
the Fuehrer to report to him in the future on any such hindrances to 
our armaments production, which from now on can no longer be tol- 
erated." That was a plain enough threat, even though I softened it some- 
what by saying that up to the winter of this year each of us had cherished 
special wishes. But now, I said, the military situation demanded that all 
superfluous construction be halted, anywhere in the country. It was our 
duty to lead the way by presenting a good example, even if the savings 
in labor forces and materials were not significant. 

I took it for granted that in spite of the monotonous tone in which 
I had read these exhortations, anyone there would see their logic and 
obey. After the speech, however, I was surrounded by party leaders who 
wanted some special building project of theirs to be exempted from the 
general rule. 

Reichsleiter Bormann was the arch offender. He easily persuaded a 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 2l6 

vacillating Hitler that the Obersalzberg project need not be canceled. 
The large crew employed there, who had to be provided for, actually 
stayed right there on the site until the end of the war, even though three 
weeks after the meeting I had again wrested a suspension order from 
Hitler.* 

Then Gauleiter Sauckel pressed forward to plead that his "Party 
Forum" in Weimar would not be affected. He too went on building 
undeterred until the end of the war. Robert Ley fought for a pigsty on 
his model farm. This was actually a war priority, he argued, since his 
experiments in hog raising were of great importance for food produc- 
tion. I turned down this request in writing but took gleeful delight in 
addressing the letter: "To the Reich Organization Chief of the National 
Socialist Party and Chief of the German Labor Front. Subject: Your 
pigsty." 

Even after I had made this ringing appeal, Hitler went ahead and had 
the tumble-down castle of Klessheim near Salzburg rebuilt into a lux- 
urious guest house at an expenditure of many millions of marks. Near 
Berchtesgaden, Himmler erected a country lodge for his mistress and did 
it so secretly that I did not hear of it until the last weeks of the war. 
Even after 1942, Hitler encouraged one of his Gauleiters to renovate a 
hotel and the Posen Castle, both projects drawing heavily on essential 
materials. The same Gauleiter had a private residence built for him- 
self in the vicinity of the city. In 1942--43 new special trains were built 
for Ley, Keitel, and others, although this kind of thing tied down valu- 
able raw materials and technicians. For the most part, however, these 
whims of the party functionaries were concealed from me. Given the 
enormous powers of the Reichsleiters and Gauleiters there was no way 
to check up on what they were doing. I therefore could rarely inter- 
pose a veto— which in any case was disregarded. As late as the summer 
of 1944 Hitler and Bormann were capable of informing their Minister of 
Armaments that a Munich manufacturer of picture frames must not be 
made to shift to war production. A few months before, on their personal 
order, the "rug factories and other producers of artistic materials," which 
were engaged in manufacturing rugs and tapestries for Hitler's postwar- 
buildings, were given a special status. 4 

* Fiihrerprotokoll, March 5-6, 1942, Point 17, 3: "The Fuehrer has ordered that 
work at Obersalzberg be halted. Compose appropriate memorandum to Reichsleiter 
Bormann." But two and a half years later, on September 8, 1944, construction there 
was still continuing. Bormann wrote to his wife: "Herr Speer who, as I see time and 
again, has not the slightest respect for me, simply went to Hagen and Schenk and 
asked for a report on the Obersalzberg construction. A crazy way to go about things! 
Instead of going through the proper channels and addressing himself to me, the God 
of Building, without any more ado he ordered my men to report directly to him! 
And since we are dependent on him for materials and labor, all I can do is put a 
good face on the matter." (Bormann, Letters, p. 103.) 



217 ) Sins of Omission 

After only nine years of rule the leadership was so corrupt that even 
in the critical phase of the war it could not cut back on its luxurious style 
of living. For "representational reasons" the leaders all needed big 
houses, hunting lodges, estates and palaces, many servants, a rich table, 
and a select wine cellar.* They were also concerned about their lives to 
an insane degree. Hitler himself, wherever he went, first of all issued 
orders for building bunkers for his personal protection. The thickness 
of their roofs increased with the caliber of the bombs until it reached 
sixteen and a half feet. Ultimately there were veritable systems of bunk- 
ers in Rastenburg, in Berlin, at Obersalzberg, in Munich, in the guest 
palace near Salzburg, at the Nauheim headquarters, and on the Somme. 
And in 1944 he had two underground headquarters blasted into moun- 
tains in Silesia and Thuringia, the project tying up hundreds of indis- 
pensable mining specialists and thousands of workmen. 5 

Hitler s obvious fear and his exaggeration of the importance of his 
own person inspired his entourage to go in for equally exaggerated 
measures of personal protection. Goering had extensive underground 
installations built not only in Karinhall, but even in the isolated castle 
of Veldenstein near Nuremberg, which he hardly ever visited. 6 The road 
from Karinhall to Berlin, forty miles long and leading mostly through 
lonely woods, had to be provided with concrete shelters at regular inter- 
vals. When Ley saw the effect of a heavy bomb on a public shelter, he 
was interested solely in comparing the thickness of the ceiling with that 
in his private bunker in the rarely attacked suburb of Grunewald. More- 
over, the Gauleiters— on orders from Hitler, who was convinced of their 
indispensability— had additional shelters built outside the cities for their 
personal protection. 

Of all the urgent questions that weighed upon me during my early 
weeks in office, solution of the labor problem was the most pressing. 
Late one evening in the middle of March, I inspected one of the lead- 
ing Berlin armaments plants, Rheinmetall-Borsig, and found its work- 
shops filled with valuable machinery, but unused. There were not 
enough workers to man a second shift. Similar conditions prevailed in 

* For propaganda reasons, Goebbels tried to change the life style of the prom- 
inent men in government and the party, but in vain. See his diary, February 22, 1942: 
"Bormann has issued a directive to the party regarding the need for greater simplicity 
in the conduct of the leaders, particularly with respect to banquets— a reminder to 
the party that it should provide a good example for the people. This directive is most 
welcome. I hope it will be taken to heart. In this connection I have become rather 
skeptical." Bormann's directive had no effect. On May 22, 1943, more than a year 
later, Goebbels wrote in his diary: "Because of the tense situation domestically the 
people naturally have been keeping a sharp eye on the life style of our so-called 
celebrities. Unfortunately many of the prominent people pay no heed; some of them 
are living a life which can in no way be called suitable under current conditions." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 2l8 

other factories. Moreover, during the day we had to reckon with difficul- 
ties with the electricity supply, whereas during the evening and night 
hours the drain on the available supply was considerably smaller. Since 
new plants worth some 11 billion marks were being built which would 
be faced with shortages of machine tools, it seemed to me more rational 
to suspend most of the new building and employ the labor force thus 
released to establish a second shift. 

Hitler seemed to accept this logic. He signed a decree ordering re- 
duction of the volume of building to 3 billion marks. But then he balked 
when, in carrying out this edict, I wanted to suspend long-term build- 
ing projects by the chemical industry involving about a billion marks. 
For he always wanted to have everything at once and reasoned as fol- 
lows: "Perhaps the war with Russia will soon be ended. But then I 
have more far-reaching plans, and for them I need more synthetic fuel 
than before. We must go on with the new factories, even though they 
may not be finished for years." A year later, on March 2, 1943, I again 
had to remonstrate that there was no point to ''building factories which 
are intended to serve great future programs and will not begin to pro- 
duce until after January 1, 1945." 7 Hitlers wrong-headed decision of 
the spring of 1942 was still a drag upon our armaments production in 
September 1944, in a military situation that had meanwhile become 
catastrophic. 

Despite Hitlers countermanding of my plan, it had nevertheless 
freed several hundred thousand construction workers, who could have 
been transferred to armaments production. But then a new, unexpected 
trouble arose: the head of the "Business Department for Labor Assign- 
ment within the Four- Year Plan," Ministerial Director Dr. Mansfeld, told 
me frankly that he lacked authority to transfer the released construction 
workers from one district to another over the objections of the Gau- 
leiters. 8 And in fact the Gauleiters, for all their rivalries and intrigues, 
closed ranks whenever any of their privileges were threatened. I realized 
that in spite of my strong position I could never deal with them alone. 
I needed someone from their number to act as my ally. I would also need 
special powers from Hitler. 

The man I had in mind was my old friend Karl Hanke, longtime 
state secretary under Goebbels, who since January 1941 had been Gau- 
leiter of Lower Silesia. Hitler proved willing to nominate a commissioner 

* This construction project tied up high-grade steel and many specialists. I op- 
posed Hitler's view, arguing that "it is better to get one hydrogenation plant built in 
a few months than to build several over a period three times as long employing a 
third of the necessary construction workers. The plant that is built quickly by con- 
centrating all the labor on the one project will provide fuel for many months to come, 
whereas if the usual practice is followed, the first deliveries of additional fuel will 
not be ready until a much later date." (Speech, April 18, 1942.) 



2ig ) Sins of Omission 

from among the Gauleiters who would be assigned to me. But Bormann 
was quick to parry. For Hanke was considered one of my adherents. His 
appointment would have meant not only a reinforcement of my power 
but also an infringement of Bormann's realm, the party hierarchy. 

Two days after my first request, when I again approached Hitler 
on the matter, he was still acquiescent to the idea, but had objections 
to my choice. "Hanke hasn't been a Gauleiter long enough and doesn't 
command the necessary respect. I've talked with Bormann. We'll take 
Sauckel."* 

Bormann had not only put in his own candidate but had managed 
to have him made his, Bormann's, direct subordinate. Goering rightly 
protested that what was involved was a task hitherto handled within the 
framework of the Four-Year Plan. With his usual indifference in admin- 
istrative matters, Hitler thereupon appointed Sauckel "Commissioner 
General," but placed him in Goering's Four- Year Plan organization. 
Goering protested once more, since the way the thing was handled 
seemed to diminish his prestige. The appointment of Sauckel should 
have come from Goering himself. But Hitler had overlooked that nicety. 
Once again Bormann had struck a blow at Goering's position. 

Sauckel and I were summoned to Hitlers headquarters. In giving 
us the document authorizing the appointment, Hitler pointed out that 
basically there could not be any such thing as a labor problem. He re- 
peated, in effect, what he had already stated on November 9, 1941: "The 
area working directly for us embraces more than two hundred fifty million 
people. Let no one doubt that we will succeed in involving every one of 
these millions in the labor process." 9 The necessary labor force, there- 
fore, was to come from the occupied territories. Hitler instructed Sauckel 
to bring the needed workers in by any means whatsoever. That order 
marked the beginning of a fateful segment of my work. 

During the early weeks of our association we cooperated smoothly. 
Sauckel gave us his pledge to eliminate all labor shortages and to pro- 
vide replacements for specialists drafted into the services. For my part, 
I helped Sauckel gain authority and supported him wherever I could. 
Sauckel had promised a great deal, for in every peacetime year the attri- 
tion of the labor force by age or death was balanced by the maturing of 
some six hundred thousand young men. Now, however, not only these 

* I must share the responsibility for Sauckel's dire labor policies. Despite dif- 
ferences of opinion on other matters, I was always in basic agreement with his mass 
deportations of foreign labor to Germany. Since Edward L. Homse, Foreign Labor in 
Nazi Germany (Princeton, 1967) gives exhaustive details on the little war that soon 
developed between Sauckel and me, I can restrict myself to the salient points. I agree 
with Homse that these internal enmities and clashes were typical. Dr. Allan S. 
Milward's recent book, The New Order and the French Economy (London, 1969), 
also gives an accurate picture. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 220 

men but sizable segments of the industrial working class were being 
drafted. In 1942, consequently, the war economy was short far more 
than one million workers. 

To put the matter briefly, Sauckel did not meet his commitments. 
Hitler s fine rhetoric about drawing labor out of a population of two 
hundred fifty million came to nought, partly because of the ineffective- 
ness of the German administration in the occupied territories, partly 
because of the preference of the men involved for taking to the forests 
and joining the partisans sooner than be dragged off for labor service 
in Germany. 

No sooner had the first foreign workers begun arriving in the fac- 
tories than I began hearing protests from our Industry Organization. 
They had a number of objections to make. The first was as follows: The 
technical specialists now being replaced by foreigners had occupied key 
posts in vital industries. Any sabotage in these plants would have far- 
reaching consequences. What was to prevent enemy espionage services 
from planting agents in Sauckel's contingents? 

Another problem was that there were not enough interpreters to 
handle the various linguistic groups. Without adequate communication, 
these new workers were as good as useless. 

It seemed far more practicable to all concerned to employ German 
women rather than assorted foreign labor. Businessmen came to me with 
statistics showing that the employment of German women during the 
First World War had been significantly higher than it was now. They 
showed me photographs of workers streaming out of the same ammuni- 
tion factory at closing time in 1918 and 1942; in the earlier war they had 
been predominantly women; now they were almost entirely men. They 
also had pictures from American and British magazines which indicated 
to what extent women were pitching in on the industrial front in those 
countries. 10 

At the beginning of April 1942 I went to Sauckel with the proposi- 
tion that we recruit our labor from the ranks of German women. He 
replied brusquely that the question of where to obtain which workers 
and how to distribute them was his business. Moreover, he said, as a 
Gauleiter he was Hitler s subordinate and responsible to the Fuehrer 
alone. But before the discussion was over, he offered to put the ques- 
tion to Goering, who as Commissioner of the Four- Year Plan should 
have the final say. Our conference with Goering took place in Karinhall. 
Goering showed plainly that he was flattered at being consulted. He 
behaved with excessive amiability toward Sauckel and was markedly 
cooler toward me. I was scarcely allowed to advance my arguments; 
Sauckel and Goering continually interrupted me. Sauckel laid great weight 
on the danger that factory work might inflict moral harm upon German 
womanhood; not only might their "psychic and emotional life" be affected 



221 ) Sins of Omission 

but also their ability to bear. Goering totally concurred. But to be abso- 
lutely sure, Sauckel went to Hitler immediately after the conference and 
had him confirm the decision. 

All my good arguments were thereby blown to the winds. Sauckel 
informed his fellow Gauleiters of his victory in a proclamation in which, 
among other things, he stated: "In order to provide the German house- 
wife, above all mothers of many children . . . with tangible relief from 
her burdens, the Fuehrer has commissioned me to bring into the Reich 
from the eastern territories some four to five hundred thousand select, 
healthy, and strong girls." 11 Whereas by 1943 England had reduced the 
number of maidservants by two-thirds, nothing of the sort took place in 
Germany until the end of the war. 12 Some 1.4 million women continued 
to be employed as household help. In addition, half a million Ukrainian 
girls helped solve the servant problem for party functionaries— a fact 
that soon caused a good deal of talk among the people. 

Armaments production is directly dependent on the supply of crude 
steel. During the First World War the German war economy drew on 
46.5 percent of its crude steel production. One of the first facts I learned 
when I took office was that the parallel figure was only 37.5 percent. 13 
In order to be able to gain more steel for armaments, I proposed to Milch 
that we jointly undertake the allocation of raw materials. 

On April 2, therefore, we once again set out for Karinhall. Goering 
at first beat about the bush, talking on a wide range of subjects, but 
finally he agreed to our suggestions about establishing a central planning 
authority within the Four- Year Plan. Impressed by our firmness, he asked 
almost shyly: "Could you possibly take in my friend Korner? Otherwise, 
he'll feel sad at the demotion."* 

This "Central Planning" soon became the most important institu- 
tion in our war economy. Actually it was incomprehensible that a top 
board of this sort to direct the various programs and priorities had not 
been established long ago. Until about 1939 Goering had personally 
taken care of this matter; but afterward there was no one with au- 
thority who could grasp the increasingly complicated and increasingly 
urgent problems and who could have leaped into the breach when 
Goering began shirking. 14 Goering's decree creating the office of Central 
Planning did in fact provide that he would have the final say whenever 
he thought necessary. But as I expected, he never asked about anything 
and we for our part had no reason ever to bother him. 15 

The Central Planning meetings took place in the large conference 
hall in my Ministry. They dragged on endlessly, with a vast number of 
participants. Ministers and state secretaries would come in person. Sup- 

Korner was Goering's state secretary and confidant. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 222 

ported by their experts, they would fight for their shares in sometimes 
highly dramatic tones. The task was particulary tricky, for we had to 
trim the civilian branch of the economy, but not so much as to impair 
its efficiency in producing what would be needed for the war industries 
or in providing basic necessities for the population. 16 

I myself was trying to push through a sizable cut in consumer goods 
production— especially since the consumer industries at the beginning 
of 1942 were producing at a rate only 3 percent below our peacetime 
level. But in 1942 the utmost I could manage was a 12 percent cut- 
back. 17 For after only three months of such austerity, Hitler began to 
regret this policy, and on June 28-29, 1942, decreed "that the fabrica- 
tion of products for the general supply of the population must be re- 
sumed/' I protested, arguing that "such a slogan today will encourage 
those who have all along been averse to our concentration on arma- 
ments to resume resistance to the present line." 18 By "those" I meant the 
party functionaries. But Hitler remained deaf to these reminders. 

Once again my efforts to organize an effective war economy had 
been ruined by Hitlers vacillation. 

In addition to more workers and more crude steel, we needed an 
expansion of the railroads. This was essential even though the Reichs- 
bahn had not yet recovered from the disaster of the Russian winter. 
Deep into German territory the tracks were still clogged by paralyzed 
trains. Transports of important war materials were therefore subject to 
intolerable delays. 

On March 5, 1942, Dr. Julius Dorpmiiller, our Minister of Transpor- 
tation and a spry man in spite of his seventy-three years, went to head- 
quarters with me in order to report to Hitler on transportation problems. 
I explained the catastrophic predicament that we were in, but since 
Dorpmiiller gave me only lame support, Hitler, as always, chose the 
brighter view of the situation. He postponed the important question, 
remarking that "conditions are probably not so serious as Speer sees 
them." 

Two weeks later, on my urging, he consented to designate a young 
official as successor to the sixty-five-year-old state secretary in the Min- 
istry of Transportation. But Dorpmiiller would not hear of it. "My state 
secretary too old?" he exclaimed when I told him what we had in mind. 
"That young man? When I was president of one of the Reichsbahn 
boards of directors in 1922, he was just starting in railroad work as a 
Reichsbahn inspector." He succeeded in keeping things as they were. 

Two months later, however, on May 21, 1941, Dorpmiiller was 
forced to confess to me: "The Reichsbahn has so few cars and loco- 
motives available for the German area that it can no longer assume re- 
sponsibility for meeting the most urgent transportation needs." This 
description of the situation, as my official journal noted, "was tanta- 



223 ) Si™ °f Omission 

mount to a declaration of bankruptcy by the Reichsbahn." That same 
day the Reich Minister of Transportation offered me the post of "traffic 
dictator," but I refused. 19 

Two days later Hitler let me bring a young Reichsbahn inspector 
named Dr. Ganzenmuller to meet him. During the past winter Dr. Gan- 
zenmuller had restored railroad traffic in a part of Russia (on the stretch 
between Minsk and Smolensk) after it had totally broken down. Hitler 
was impressed: "I like the man; I'm going to make him state secretary at 
once." Shouldn't we speak with Dorpmuller about that first, I suggested. 
"Absolutely not!" Hitler exclaimed. "Don t let either Dorpmuller or Gan- 
zenmuller know anything about it. Ill simply summon you, Herr Speer, 
to headquarters with your man. Then Til have the Transportation Min- 
ister come here separately." 

On Hitlers instructions both men were put up at headquarters in 
different barracks, and Dr. Ganzenmuller entered Hitlers office without 
knowing what awaited him. There are minutes of Hitler s remarks which 
were made the same day: 

The transportation problem is crucial; therefore it must be solved. All 
my life, but more so than ever in the past winter, I have confronted crucial 
questions that had to be solved. So-called experts and men who by rights 
should have been leaders repeatedly told me: "That isn't possible, that 
won't do!" I cannot resign myself to such talk! There are problems that 
absolutely have to be solved. Where real leaders are present, these problems 
always are solved and always will be solved. This cannot be done by pleas- 
ant methods. Pleasantness is not what counts for me; in the same way, it 
is a matter of complete indifference to me what posterity will say about 
the methods I have been compelled to use. For me there is only a single 
question that must be solved: We must win the war or Germany faces 
annihilation. 

Hitler went on to recount how he had pitted his will against the 
disaster of the past winter and against the generals who urged retreat. 
From this, he made a slight jump to the transport problem and men- 
tioned some of the measures which I had earlier recommended to him 
as necessary if order were to be restored to the railways. Without call- 
ing in the Minister of Transportation, who was now waiting outside, 
also ignorant of what this was all about, he appointed Ganzenmuller the 
new state secretary in the Transportation Ministry because "he has 
proved at the front that he possesses the energy to restore order to the 
muddled transportation situation." Only at this point were Minister 
of Transportation Dorpmuller and his assistant, Ministerial Director 
Leibbrandt, brought into the conference. He had decided, Hitler an- 
nounced, to intervene in the transportation situation, since victory de- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 224 

pended on it. Then he continued with one of his standard arguments: 
"In my day I started with nothing, an obscure soldier in the World War, 
and began my career only when all others, who seemed more destined 
to leadership than I, failed. The whole course of my life proves that I 
never capitulate. The tasks of the war must be mastered. I repeat: For 
me the word 'impossible' does not exist." And he repeated, almost 
screaming: "It does not exist for me!" Thereupon he informed the Min- 
ister of Transportation that he had appointed the former Reichsbahn 
inspector the new state secretary in the Ministry of Transportation— an 
embarrassing situation for the Minister, for the state secretary, and for 
me as well. 

Hitler had always spoken with great respect of Dorpmiiller s ex- 
pertise. In view of that Dorpmiiller could have expected that the ques- 
tion of his deputy would first be discussed with him. But apparently 
Hitler (as was so often the case when he confronted experts) wanted 
to avoid an awkward argument by presenting the Minister of Trans- 
portation with a fait accompli. And in fact Dorpmiiller took this humili- 
ation in silence. 

Hitler now turned to Field Marshal Milch and me and instructed us 
to act temporarily as transportation dictators. We were to see to it that 
the requirements were "met to the largest extent and in the fastest time." 
With the disarming comment, "We cannot allow the war to be lost be- 
cause of the transportation question; therefore it can be solved!" 20 Hitler 
adjourned the meeting. 

In fact it was solved. The young state secretary found procedures 
for handling the backup of trains. He speeded traffic and was able to 
provide for the increased transportation needs of the war plants. A 
special committee for rolling stock took charge of the locomotives dam- 
aged by the Russian winter; repair techniques were much accelerated. 
Instead of the previous craft system of manufacturing locomotives, we 
went over to assembly-line methods and increased production many 
fold. 21 In spite of the steadily rising demands of the war, traffic con- 
tinued to flow in the future, or at least until the systematic air raids of 
the fall of 1944 once again throttled traffic and made transportation, 
this time for good, the greatest bottleneck in our war economy. 

When Goering heard that we intended to increase production of 
locomotives many times over, he summoned me to Karinhall. He had a 
suggestion to offer, which was that we build locomotives out of concrete, 
since we did not have enough steel available. Of course the concrete 
locomotives would not last as long as steel ones, he said; but to make 
up for that we would simply have to produce more of them. Quite how 
that was to be accomplished, he did not know; nevertheless, he clung 
for months to this weird idea for the sake of which I had squandered a 
two-hour drive and two hours of waiting time. And I had come home on 



225 ) Sins of Omission 

an empty stomach, for visitors in Karinhall were seldom offered a meal. 
That was the only concession the Goering household made to the needs 
of a total war economy. 

A week after Ganzenmuller's appointment, at which such heroic 
words had been spoken on the solution of the transportation crisis, I 
visited Hitler once more. In keeping with my view that in critical times 
the leadership must set a good example, I proposed to Hitler that the 
use of private railroad cars by government and party officials be discon- 
tinued for the time being. Naturally, I was not thinking of Hitler himself 
when I made this suggestion. But Hitler demurred; private cars were a 
necessity in the east, he said, because of the poor housing conditions. I 
corrected him: most of the cars were not being used in the east, I said, 
but inside the Reich. And I presented him with a long list of the prominent 
users of private cars. But I had no luck. 22 

I met regularly for lunch with General Friedrich Fromm in a 
chambre sSparee at Horcher's Restaurant. In the course of one of these 
meetings, at the end of April 1942, he remarked that our only chance of 
winning the war lay in developing a weapon with totally new effects. He 
said he had contacts with a group of scientists who were on the track 
of a weapon which could annihilate whole cities, perhaps throw the 
island of England out of the fight. Fromm proposed that we pay a joint 
visit to these men. It seemed to him important, he said, at least to have 
spoken with them. 

Dr. Albert Vogler, head of the largest German steel company and 
president of the Kaiser Wilhelm Gesellschaft, also called my attention at 
this time to the neglected field of nuclear research. He complained of 
the inadequate support fundamental research was receiving from the 
Ministry of Educa tion and Science, which naturally did not have much 
Influence during^wartSneT^TMay 6, 1942, 1 discussed this situation with 
Hitler and proposed that Goering be placed at the head of the Reich 
Research Council— thus emphasizing its importance. 23 A month later, on 
June 9, 1942, Goering was appointed to this post. 

Around the same time the three military representatives of armaments 
production, Milch, Fromm, and Witzell, met with me at Harnack House, 
the Berlin center of the Kaiser Wilhelm Gesellschaft, to be briefed on the 
subject of German atomic research. Along with scientists whose names I 
no longer recall, the subsequent Nobel Prize winner s Otto Hahn and 
Werner Heisenberg were present. After a few demonstration lectures 
on the matter as awhole, Heisenberg reported on "Atom-smashing and the 7 
development of the uranium machine [sic] and the cyclotron." 24 J 
Heisenberg had bitter words to say about the Ministry of Education's 
neglect of nuclear research, about the lack of funds and materials, 
and the drafting of scientific men into the services. Excerpts from 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 226 

American technical journals suggested that plenty of technical and fi- 
nancial resources were available there for nuclear research. This meant 
that America probably had a head start in the matter, whereas Germany 
had been in the forefront of these studies only a few years ago. In view 
of the revolutionary possibilities of nuclear fission, dominance in this 
field was fraught with enormous consequences. 

After the lecture I asked Heisenberg how nuclear physics could be 
applied to the manufacture of atom bombs. His answer was by no means 
encouraging. He declared, to be sure, that the scientific solution had 
already been found and that theoretically nothing stood in the way of 
building such a bomb. But the technical prerequisites for production 
would take years to develop, two years at the earliest, even provided that 
the program was given maximum support. Difficulties were compounded, 
Heisenberg explained, by the fact that Europe possessed only one cyclo- 
tron, and that of minimal capacity. Moreover, it was located in Paris and 
because of the need for secrecy could not be used to full advantage. I 
proposed that with the powers at my disposal as Minister of Armaments 
we build cyclotrons as large as or larger than those in the United States. 
But Heisenberg said that because we lacked experience we would have to 
begin by building only a relatively small type. 

Nevertheless, General Fromm offered to release several hundred 
scientific assistants from the services, while I urged the scientists to in- 
form me of the measures, the sums of money, and the materials they 
would need to further nuclear research. A few weeks later they pre- 
sented their request: an appropriation of several hundred thousand 
marks and some small amounts of steel, nickel, and other priority 
metals. In addition, they asked for the building of a bunker, the erection 
of several barracks, and the pledge that their experiments would be given 
highest priority. Plans for building the first German cyclotron had already 
been approved. Rather put out by these modest requests in a matter of 
such crucial importance, I suggested that they take one or two million 
marks and correspondingly larger quantities of materials. But apparently 
more could not be utilized for the present, 25 and in any case I had been 
given the impression that the atom bomb could no longer have any bearing 
on the course of the war. 

I was familiar with Hitler s tendency to push fantastic projects by 
making senseless demands, so that on June 23, 1942, I reported to him 
only very briefly on the nuclear-fission conference and what we had de- 
cided to do. 26 Hitler received more detailed and more glowing reports 
from his photographer, Heinrich Hoffmann, who was friendly with Post 
Office Minister Ohnesorge. Goebbels, too, may have told him something 
about it. Ohnesorge was interested in nuclear research and was supporting 
—like the SS— an independent research apparatus under the direction of 
Manfred von Ardenne, a young physicist. It is significant that Hitler did 



227 ) Sirw of Omission 

not choose the direct route of obtaining information on this matter 
from responsible people but depended instead on unreliable and in- 
competent informants to give him a Sunday-supplement account. Here 
again was proof of his love for amateurishness and his lack of under- 
standing of fundamental scientific research. 

Hitler had sometimes spoken to me about the possibility of an atom 
bomb, but the idea quite obviously strained his intellectual capacity. 
He was also unable to grasp the revolutionary nature of nuclear physics. 
In the twenty-two hundred recorded points of my conferences with 
Hitler, nuclear fission comes up only once, and then is mentioned with 
extreme brevity. Hitler did sometimes comment on its prospects, but 
what I told him of my conference with the physicists confirmed his view 
that there was not much profit in the matter. Actually, Professor 
Heisenberg had not given any final answer to my question whether a 
successful nuclear fission could be kept under control with absolute 
certainty or might continue as a chain reaction. Hitler was plainly not I 
delighted with the possibility that the earth under his rule might be I 
transformed into a glowing star. Occasionally, however, he joked that the J 
scientists in their unworldly urge to lay bare all the secrets under heaven 
might some day set the globe on fire. But undoubtedly a good deal of time 
would pass before that came about, Hitler said; he would certainly 
not live to see it. 

I am sure that Hitler would not have hesitated for a moment to 
employ atom bombs against England. I remember his reaction to the 
final scene of a newsreel on the bombing of Warsaw in the autumn of 
1939* We were sitting with him and Goebbels in his Berlin salon watching 
the film. Clouds of smoke darkened the sky; dive bombers tilted and 
hurtled toward their goal; we could watch the flight of the released 
bombs, the pull-out of the planes and the cloud from the explosions 
expanding gigantically. The effect was enhanced by running the film in 
slow motion. Hitler was fascinated. The film ended with a montage 
showing a plane diving toward the outlines of the British Isles. A burst 
of flame followed, and the island flew into the air in tatters. Hitlers 
enthusiasm was unbounded. "That is what will happen to them!" he cried 
out, carried away. "That is how we will annihilate them!" 

On the suggestion of the nuclear physicists we scuttled the project 
to develop an atom bomb by the autumn of 1942, after I had again queried 
them about deadlines and been told that we could not count on anything 
for three or four years. The war would certainly have been decided long 
before then. Instead I authorized the development of an energy-producing 
uranium motor for propelling machinery. The navy was interested in that 
for its submarines. 

In the course of a visit to the Krupp Works I asked to be shown 
parts of our first cyclotron and asked the technician in charge whether 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 228 

we could not go on and build a considerably larger apparatus. But he 
confirmed what Professor Heisenberg had previously said: We lacked 
the technical experience. At Heidelberg in the summer of 1944, I was 
shown our first cyclotron splitting an atomic nucleus. To my questions, 
Professor Walther Bo the explained that this cyclotron would be useful 
for medicaT and biological research. I had to rest content with that. 

In the summer of 1943, wolframite imports from Portugal were cut 
off, which created a critical situation for the production of solid-core 
ammunition. I thereupon ordered the use of uranium cores for this type 
of ammunition. 27 My release of our uranium stocks of about twelve 
hundred metric tons showed that we no longer had any thought of 
producing atom bombs. 

Perhaps it would have proved possible to have the atom bomb ready 
for employment in 1945. But it would have meant mobilizing all our 
technical and financial resources to that end, as well as our scientific 
talent. It would have meant giving up all other projects, such as the 
development of the rocket weapons. From this point of view, too, 
Peenemiinde was not only our biggest but our most misguided project.* 
""" Our failure to pursue the possibilities of atomic warfare can be 
partly traced to ideological reasons. Hitler had great respect for Philipp 
Lenard, the physicist who had received the Nobel Prize in 1920 and was 
one of the few early adherents of Nazism among the ranks of the scientists. 
Lenard had instilled the idea in Hitler that the Jews were exerting a 
seditious influence in their concern with nuclear physics and the relativity 
theory.** To his table companions Hitler occasionally referred to nuclear 
physics as "Jewish physics"— citing Lenard as his authority for this. This 
view was taken up by Rosenberg. It thus becomes clearer why the 
Minister of Education was not inclined to support nuclear research. 

But even if Hitler had not had this prejudice against nuclear research 
and even if the state of our fundamental research in June 1942 could have 

* From 1937 to 1940 the army spent five hundred and fifty million marks on 
the development of a large rocket. But success was out of the question, for Hitler's 
principle of scattering responsibility meant that even scientific research teams were 
divided and often at odds with one another. According to the Office Journal, August 
17, 1944, not only the three branches of the armed forces but also other organizations, 
the SS, the postal system, and such, had separate research facilities. In the United 
States, on the other hand, all the atomic physicists— to take an example— were in one 
organization. 

** According to L. W. Helwig, Personlichkeiten der Gegenwart (1940), Lenard 
inveighed against "relativity theories produced by alien minds." In his four-volume 
work, Die Deutsche Physik (1935), Helwig considered physics "cleansed of the out- 
growths which the by now well-known findings of race research have shown to be 
the exclusive products of the Jewish mind and which the German Volk must shun 
as racially incompatible with itself." 



229 ) Sins of Omission 

freed several billion instead of several million marks for the production 
of atom bombs, it would have been impossible— given the strain on our 
economic resources— to have provided the materials, priorities, and tech- 
nical workers corresponding to such an investment. For it was not only 
superior productive capacity that allowed the United States to undertake 
this gigantic project. The increasing air raids had long since created an 
armaments emergency in Germany which ruled out any such ambitious 
enterprise. At best, with extreme concentration of all our resources, we 
could have had a German atom bomb by 1947, but certainly we could 
not beat the Americans, whose bomb was ready by August 1945. And 
on the other hand the consumption of our latest reserves of chromium ore 
would have ended the war by January 1, 1946, at the very latest. 

Thus, from the start of my work as Minister of Armaments I 
discovered blunder after blunder, in all departments of the economy. 
Incongruously enough, Hitler himself used to say, during those war 
years: "The loser of this war will be the side that makes the greatest 
blunders." For Hitler, by a succession of wrong-headed decisions, helped 
to speed the end of a war already lost because of productive capacities— 
for example, by his confused planning of the air war against England, 
by the shortage of U-boats at the beginning of the war, and, in general, 
by his failure to develop an overall plan for the war. So that when many 
German memoirs comment on Hitlers decisive mistakes, the writers are 
completely right. But all that does not mean that the war could have 
been won. 



17 

Commander in Chief Hitler 



Amateurishness was one of hitler's dominant traits, he had never 
learned a profession and basically had always remained an outsider to 
all fields of endeavor. Like many self-taught people, he had no idea 
what real specialized knowledge meant. Without any sense of the com- 
plexities of any great task, he boldly assumed one function after another. 
Unburdened by standard ideas, his quick intelligence sometimes con- 
ceived unusual measures which a specialist would not have hit on at 
all. The victories of the early years of the war can literally be attributed 
to Hitler's ignorance of the rules of the game and his layman's delight 
in decision making. Since the opposing side was trained to apply rules 
which Hitler's self-taught, autocratic mind did not know and did not use, 
he achieved surprises. These audacities, coupled with military superiority, 
were the basis of his early successes. But as soon as setbacks occurred he 
suffered shipwreck, like most untrained people. Then his ignorance of the 
rules of the game was revealed as another kind of incompetence; then 
his defects were no longer strengths. The greater the failures became, the 
more obstinately his incurable amateurishness came to the fore. The 
tendency to wild decisions had long been his forte; now it speeded his 
downfall. 

Every two or three weeks I traveled from Berlin to spend a few 
days in Hitler's East Prussian, and later in his Ukrainian, headquarters 
in order to have him decide the many technical questions of detail in 

( *2P ) 



231 ) Commander in Chief Hitler 

which he was interested in his capacity as Commander in Chief of the 
army. Hitler knew all the types of ordnance and ammunition, including 
the calibers, the lengths of barrels, and the range of fire. He had 
the stocks of the most important items of armament in his head— as well 
as the monthly production figures. He was able to compare our quotas 
with our deliveries and draw conclusions. 

Hitler naive pleasure at being able to shine in the field of armaments, 
as previously in automobile manufacturing or in architecture, by reciting 
abstruse figures, made it plain that in this realm also he was working 
as an amateur. He seemed to be constantly endeavoring to show himself 
the equal of or even the superior of the experts. The real expert sensibly 
does not burden his mind with details that he can look up or leave to an 
assistant. Hitler, however, felt it necessary for his own self-esteem to 
parade his knowledge. But he also enjoyed doing it. 

He obtained his information from a large book in a red binding 
with broad yellow diagonal stripes. It was a catalogue, continually 
being brought up to date, of from thirty to fifty different types of am- 
munition and ordnance. He kept it on his night table. Sometimes he 
would order a servant to bring the book down when in the course of 
military conferences an assistant had mentioned a figure which Hitler 
instantly corrected. The book was opened and Hitler's data would be 
confirmed, without fail, every time, while the general would be shown 
to be in error. Hitler's memory for figures was the terror of his entourage. 

By tricks of this sort, Hitler could intimidate the majority of 
the officers who surrounded him. But on the other hand he felt uncertain 
when he was confronting an out-and-out technical expert. He did not 
insist on his opinion if a specialist objected. 

My predecessor, Todt, had sometimes gone to conferences with Hitler 
accompanied by two of his closest associates, Xaver Dorsch and Karl 
Saur; occasionally, he would bring one of his experts along. But he 
thought it important to deliver his reports personally and to involve 
his associates only on difficult points of detail. From the very first I 
did not even take the trouble to memorize figures which Hitler in any case 
kept in his head better than I. But knowing Hitler's respect for specialists, 
I would come to conferences flanked by all those experts who had the 
best mastery of the various points under discussion. 

I was thus saved from the nightmare of all "Fuehrer conferences"— 
the fear of being driven into a corner by a bombardment of figures and 
technical data. I consistently appeared at the Fuehrer's headquarters 
accompanied by approximately twenty civilians. Before long everybody 
in Restricted Area I, as the specially guarded area round the headquarters 
was known, was making fun of "Speer's invasions." Depending on the 
subjects to be discussed, from two to four of my experts were invited 
to the conferences which took place in the situation room of the 
headquarters, adjacent to Hitler's private apartment. It was a modestly 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 232 

furnished room about nine hundred square feet in area, the walls paneled 
in light-colored wood. The room was dominated by a heavy oak map 
table thirteen feet long next to a large window. In one corner was a 
smaller table surrounded by six armchairs. Here our conference group sat. 

During these conferences I remained in the background as far as 
possible. I opened them with a brief reference to the subject and then 
asked one of the experts present to state his views. Neither the environ- 
ment, with its innumerable generals, adjutants, guard areas, barriers, 
and passes, nor the aureole that this whole apparatus conferred upon 
Hitler, could intimidate these specialists. Their many years of success- 
ful practice of their professions gave them a clear sense of their rank 
and their responsibility. Sometimes the conversation developed into a 
heated discussion, for they quite often forgot whom they were addressing. 
Hitler took all this partly with humor, partly with respect. In this circle 
he seemed modest and treated my people with remarkable courtesy. With 
them, moreover, he refrained from his habit of killing opposition by 
long, exhaustive, and numbing speeches. He knew how to distinguish 
key matters from those of lesser importance, was adaptable, and sur- 
prised everyone by the swiftness with which he could choose among 
several possibilities and justify his choice. Effortlessly, he found his 
bearings when presented with technical processes, plans, and sketches. His 
questions showed that during the brief explanation period he could 
grasp the essentials of complicated subjects. However, there was a dis- 
advantage to this which he was unaware of: He arrived at the core of 
matters too easily and therefore could not understand them with real 
thoroughness. 

I could never predict what the result of our conferences would be. 
Sometimes he instantly approved a proposal whose prospects seemed 
exceedingly slight. Sometimes he obstinately refused to permit certain 
trivial measures which he himself had demanded only a short time before. 
Nevertheless, my system of circumventing Hitler's knowledge of detail 
by having experts confront him with even more detailed knowledge netted 
me more successes than failures. His other associates observed with 
astonishment and with some degree of envy that Hitler often changed 
his inind after hearing our counterproposals and would alter decisions 
which in the preceding military conferences he had called unalterable. 1 

Hitler's tecnnical horizon, however, just like his general ideas, his 
views on art, and his style of life, was limited by the First World War. 
His technical interests were narrowly restricted to the traditional weapons 
of the army and f ^o navy. In these areas he had continued to learn and 
steadily increased his knowledge, so that he frequently proposed con- 
vincing and usable innovations. But he had little feeling for such new 
developments as, for example, radar, the construction of an atom bomb, 
jet £ * l^i*s, anc* Ivets. On his rare flights in the newly developed Condor 



233 ) Commander in Chief Hitler 

he showed concern that the mechanism which let down the retracted 
landing gear might not function. Warily, he declared that he preferred 
the old Junkers 52 with its rigid landing gear. 

Very often, directly after one of these conferences Hitler would 
lecture his military advisers on the technical knowledge he had just 
acquired. He loved to present such pieces of information with a casual 
air, as if the knowledge were his own. 

When the Russian T-34 appeared, Hitler was triumphant, for he 
could then point out that he had earlier demanded the kind of long- 
barreled gun it had. Even before my appointment as Minister of Arma- 
ments, I heard Hitler in the Chancellery garden, after a demonstration 
of the Panzer IV, inveighing against the obstinacy of the Army Ordnance 
Office which had turned down his idea for increasing the velocity of the 
missile by lengthening the barrel. The Ordnance Office had at the time 
presented counterarguments: The long barrel would overload the tank 
in front, since it was not built with such a gun in view. If so major a 
change were introduced, the whole design would be thrown out of 
balance. 

Hitler would always bring up this incident whenever his ideas 
encountered opposition. "I was right at the time, and no one wanted to 
believe me. Now I am right again!" When the army felt the need for 
a tank which could outmaneuver the comparatively fast T-34 by greater 
speed, Hitler insisted that more would be gained by increasing the range 
of the guns and the weight of the armor. In this field, too, he had 
mastered the necessary figures and could recite penetration results and 
missile velocities by heart. He usually defended his theory by the example 
of warships: 

In a naval battle the side having the greater range can open fire at the 
greater distance. Even if it is only half a mile. If along with this he has 
stronger armor ... he must necessarily be superior. What are you after? 
The faster ship has only one advantage: to utilize its greater speed for re- 
treating. Do you mean to say a ship can possibly overcome heavier armor and 
superior artillery by greater speed? It's exactly the same for tanks. Your 
faster tank has to avoid meeting the heavier tank. 

My experts from industry were not direct participants in these 
discussions. Our business was to build the tanks according to the re- 
quirements set by the army, whether these were decided by Hitler, by the 
General Staff, or by the Army Ordnance Office. Questions of battle 
tactics were not our concern; such discussions were usually conducted by 
the army officers. In 1942, Hitler still encouraged such discussions. He was 
still listening quietly to objections and offering his arguments just as 
quietly. Nevertheless, his arguments carried special weight. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 234 

Since the Tiger had originally been designed to weigh fifty tons but 
as a result of Hitler's demands had gone up to seventy-five tons, we 
decided to develop a new thirty-ton tank whose very name, Panther, was 
to signify greater agility. Though light in weight, its motor was to be 
the same as the Tiger s, which meant it could develop superior speed. 
But in the course of a year Hitler once again insisted on clapping so 
much armor on it, as well as larger guns, that it ultimately reached forty- 
eight tons, the original weight of the Tiger. 

In order to compensate for this strange transformation of a swift 
Panther into a slow Tiger, we made still another effort to produce a 
series of small, light, quick-moving tanks. 2 By way of pleasing and re- 
assuring Hitler, Porsche also undertook to design a superheavy tank which 
weighed over a hundred tons and hence could be built only in small 
numbers, one by one. For security purposes this new monster was as- 
signed the code name Mouse. In any case Porsche had personally taken 
over Hitler's bias for superheaviness and would occasionally bring the 
Fuehrer reports about parallel developments on the part of the enemy. 
Once, Hitler sent for General Buhle and demanded: "I have just heard 
that an enemy tank is coming along with armor far beyond anything we 
have. Have you any documentation of that? If it is true a new antitank 
gun must be developed instantly. The force of penetration must . . . the 
gun must be enlarged, or lengthened— to be brief, we must begin reacting 
immediately. Instantly." 3 

Thus, Hitlers decisions led to a multiplicity of parallel projects. They 
also led to more and more complicated problems of supply. One of his 
worst failings was that he simply did not understand the necessity for 
supplying the armies with sufficient spare parts.* General Guderian, the 
Inspector General of Tank Ordnance, frequently pointed out to me that 
if we could repair our tanks quickly, thanks to sufficient spare parts, we 
could have more available for battle, at a fraction of the cost, than by 
producing new ones. But Hitler insisted on the priority of new produc- 
tion, which would have had to be reduced by 20 percent if we made 
provision for such repairs. 

General Fromm as Chief of the Reserve Army was deeply concerned 
about this kind of poor planning. I took him with me to see Hitler 
several times so that he could present the arguments of the military. 
Fromm knew how to state a problem clearly; he had presence and had 
diplomatic tact. Sitting there, his sword pressed between his knees, hand 
on the hilt, he looked charged with energy; and to this day I believe 



* This disastrous tendency was evident as early as 1942: "Presented the Fuehrer 
with the monthly list of tank replacement parts and reported that despite the increase 
in production the demand is so high that to raise the production of spare parts we 
must decrease the production of new tanks." (Fiihrerprotokoll, May 6-7, 1942, Point 

38.) 



2 35 ) Commander in Chief Hitler 

that his great abilities might have prevented many a blunder at the Fueh- 
rer's headquarters. After several conferences, in fact, his influence in- 
creased. But immediately opposition appeared, both on the part of Keitel, 
who saw his position threatened, and on the part of Goebbels, who tried to 
persuade Hitler that Fromm had a dangerous political record. Finally, 
Hitler clashed with Fromm over a question of reserve supplies. Curtly, 
he let me know that I was no longer to bring Fromm with me. 

Many of my conferences with Hitler were concerned with establish- 
ing the armaments programs for the army. Hitlers point of view was: The 
more I demand, the more I receive. And to my astonishment programs 
which industrial experts considered impossible to carry out were in the 
end actually surpassed. Hitler s authority liberated reserves that nobody 
had taken into his calculations. From 1944 on, however, his programs 
became totally unrealistic. Our efforts to push these through in the 
factories were self-defeating. 

It often seemed to me that Hitler used these prolonged conferences 
on armaments and war production as an escape from his military re- 
sponsibilities. He himself admitted to me that he found in them a relaxa- 
tion similar to our former conferences on architecture. Even in crisis 
situations he devoted many hours to such discussions, sometimes refusing 
to interrupt them even when his field marshals or ministers urgently 
wanted to speak with him. 

Our technical conferences were usually combined with a demonstra- 
tion of new weapons which took place in a nearby field. A few moments 
before we would have been sitting intimately with Hitler, but now 
everybody had to line up in rank and file, Field Marshal Keitel, chief of 
the OKW (High Command of the Armed Forces), on the right. Obviously, 
Hitler laid stress on the ceremonial aspect of the occasion, adding a 
further note of formality by entering his official limousine to cover the 
few hundred yards to the field. I took my place in the back seat. Hitler 
would then step out, and Keitel would report the presence of the waiting 
line of generals and technicians. 

This ritual concluded, the group promptly broke up. Hitler looked 
into details, clambered over the vehicles on portable steps held in readi- 
ness for him, and continued his discussions with the specialists. Often 
Hitler and I would make appreciative remarks about the weapons, such 
as: 'What an elegant barrel," or, 'What a fine shape this tank has!"— a 
ludicrous relapse into the terminology of our joint inspections of architec- 
tural models. 

In the course of one such inspection, Keitel mistook a 7.5 centimeter 
antitank gun for a light field howitzer. Hitler passed over the mistake 
at the time but had his joke on our ride back: "Did you hear that? Keitel 
and the antitank gun? Arid he's a general of the artillery!" 

Another time the air force had lined up on a nearby airfield the 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 236 

multiple variants and types in its production program for Hitler s inspec- 
tion. Goering had himself reserved the right to explain the planes to 
Hitler. His staff thereupon provided him with a cram sheet, in the order 
of the models on display, giving their names, flight characteristics, and 
other technical data. One type had not been brought up in time, and 
Goering had not been informed. From that point on he blandly mis- 
identified everything, for he adhered strictly to his list. Hitler instantly 
perceived the error but gave no sign. 

At the end of June 1942 1 read in the newspapers, just like everyone 
else, that a great new offensive in the east had begun. There was a mood 
of exuberance at headquarters. Every evening Hitlers chief adjutant, 
Schmundt, traced the onrush of the troops on a wall map, for the edifica- 
tion of civilians at headquarters. Hitler was triumphant. Once again he 
had proved that he was right and the generals wrong— for they had 
advised against an offensive and called for defensive tactics, occasionally 
straightening out the front. Even General Fromm had brightened up, 
although at the beginning of the operation he had commented to me that 
any such offensive was a luxury in the "poor mans" situation we were in. 

The left wing east of Kiev grew longer and longer. The troops were 
approaching Stalingrad. Feats were performed to maintain emergency 
railroad traffic in the newly won territories and thus keep supplies moving. 

Barely three weeks after the beginning of the successful offensive 
Hitler moved to an advanced headquarters near the Ukrainian city of 
Vinnitsa. Since Russian air activity was as good as nonexistent and the 
west this time was too far away, even given Hitler s anxieties, he for 
once did not demand the building of any special air-raid shelters. Instead 
of the usual concrete buildings a pleasant-looking cluster of blockhouses 
scattered about a forest was established. 

Whenever I had to fly to the new headquarters, I used what free 
time I had to drive around the country. Once I drove to Kiev. Immediately 
after the October Revolution avant-gardists like Le Corbusier, May, or 
El Lissitzky had influenced modern Russian architecture. But under 
Stalin at the end of the twenties it had all swung back to a conservative 
and classicist style. The conference building in Kiev, for example, could 
have been designed by a good pupil of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts. I toyed 
with the notion of searching out the architect and employing him in Ger- 
many. A classicist stadium in Kiev was adorned with statues of athletes in 
the fashion of classical antiquity— but touchingly, the figures were clad in 
bathing suits. 

I found one of the most famous churches of Kiev a heap of rubble. 
A Soviet powder magazine had blown up inside it, I was told. Later, I 
learned from Goebbels that the church had been blown up deliberately 
on orders of Erich Koch, Reich Commissioner for the Ukraine; the idea 



*37 ) Commander in Chief Hitler 

had been to destroy this symbol of Ukrainian national pride. Goebbels 
told the story with displeasure; he was horrified by the brutal course 
being pursued in occupied sectors of the Soviet Union. In fact the Ukraine 
at that time was still so peaceable that I could drive through the extensive 
forests without an escort. Half a year later, thanks to the twisted policy 
of the eastern commissioners, the whole area was infested with partisans. 
Other drives took me to the industrial center of Dnepropetrovsk. 
What most impressed me was a university complex under construction. Its 
facilities went far beyond anything in Germany and left no doubt of the 
Soviet Unions determination to become a technical power of the first 
rank. I also visited the power plant of Saporoshe, blown up by the Rus- 
sians. A large construction crew closed the blast hole in the dam, but 
they also had to install new turbines. Before retreating, the Russians 
had thrown the oil switch, interrupting the oiling of their turbines 
while they were running at full speed. The machines ran hot and finally 
ground themselves into a useless tangle of parts— a feat which could be 
accomplished by a single man pulling a lever. The vision of that later 
gave me many a sleepless hour when I learned of Hitlers intention to 
make Germany a wasteland. 

Even at the Fuehrer's headquarters, Hitler kept to his habit of 
taking his meals in the midst of his close associates. But whereas at the 
Chancellery party uniforms had dominated the scene, he was now sur- 
rounded by generals and officers of his staff. In contrast to the luxuriously 
furnished dining hall in the Chancellery, this dining room looked rather 
like the railroad station restaurant in a small town. Pine boarding formed 
the walls, and the windows were those of a standardized barracks. There 
was a long table for about twenty persons, flanked by plain chairs. Hitler's 
seat was on the window side in the middle of the long table; Keitel sat 
facing him, while the places of honor on either side of Hitler were re- 
served for the ever-changing visitors. As in past days in Berlin, Hitler 
talked long-windedly about his favorite subjects, while his dinner guests 
were reduced to silent listeners. It was apparent, however, that Hitler 
made an effort in the presence of these men, with whom he was not 
especially intimate and who moreover were his superiors by birth and 
education, to present his thoughts in as impressive a manner as possible.* 
Thus the level of the table talk in the Fuehrer's headquarters differed from 
that at the Chancellery. It was considerably higher. 

During the first weeks of the offensive we had discussed the rapid 

* Tischgesprache (Table Talk) published by Picker gives a good idea of Hitler's 
topics of conversation. But we must remember that this collection includes only those 
passages in Hitler's monologues— they took up one to two hours every day— which 
struck Picker as significant. Complete transcripts would reinforce the sense of stifling 
boredom. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 238 

progress of the troops in the South Russian plains in an exultant mood. 
By contrast, after two months the faces of the diners grew increasingly 
doleful, and Hitler too began to lose his self-assurance. 

Our troops had, it is true, taken the oil fields of Maikop. The 
leading tank columns were already fighting along the Terek and pushing 
on, over a roadless steppe near Astrakhan toward the southern Volga. But 
this advance was no longer maintaining the pace of the first weeks. Sup- 
plies could no longer keep up; the spare parts the tanks carried with them 
had long since been consumed, so that the fighting wedge was steadily 
thinning out. Moreover, our monthly armaments production lagged far 
behind the demands of an offensive over such enormous spaces. At that 
time we were manufacturing only a third of the tanks and a fourth of 
the artillery we were to be producing in 1944. Aside from that, normal 
wear and tear was extremely high over such distances. The tank testing 
station at Kummersdorf operated on the assumption that the treads or the 
motor of a heavy tank would need repairs after four to five hundred miles. 

Hitler realized none of this. With the enemy supposedly too weak 
to offer any resistance, he wanted the exhausted German troops to thrust 
on to the southern side of the Caucasus, toward Georgia. He therefore 
detached considerable forces from the already weakened wedge and di- 
rected them to advance beyond Maikop toward Sochi. These contingents 
were supposed to reach Sukhumi by way of the narrow coastal road. This 
was where the main blow was to be delivered; he assumed that the ter- 
ritory north of the Caucasus would fall easily to him in any case. 

But the units were done in. They could no longer push forward, 
however imperiously Hitler ordered it. In the situation conferences 
Hitler was shown aerial photos of the impenetrable walnut forests out- 
side Sochi. Chief of Staff Haider warned Hitler that the Russians could 
easily render the coastal road impassable for a long time by blasting the 
steep slopes. In any case, he argued, the road was too narrow for the 
advance of large troop units. But Hitler remained unimpressed: 

These difficulties can be overcome as all difficulties can be overcome! 
First we must conquer the road. Then the way is open to the plains south 
of the Caucasus. There we can deploy our armies freely and set up 
supply camps. Then, in one or two years, we'll start an offensive into the 
underbelly of the British Empire. With a minimum of effort we can liberate 
Persia and Iraq. The Indians will hail our divisions enthusiastically. 

When in 1944 we were combing through the printing trade for un- 
necessary assignments, we came upon a plant in Leipzig that was turning 
out Persian maps and language guides for the OKW in large quantities. 
The contract had been let and then forgotten. 

Even a layman like myself could tell that the offensive had rim it- 



2 39 ) Commander in Chief Hitler 

self into the ground. Then the report arrived that a detachment of German 
mountain troops had taken Mount Elbrus, nearly nineteen thousand feet 
high, the highest mountain in the Caucasus and surrounded by broad 
fields of glaciers. They had planted the German war flag there. To be 
sure, this was a superfluous action, certainly on the smallest scale,* which 
could be understood only as an adventure by a group of enthusiastic 
mountain climbers. All of us could sympathize with the impulse behind 
this act, but otherwise it seemed to us completely unimportant. I often 
saw Hitler furious but seldom did his anger erupt from him as it did 
when this report came in. For hours he raged as if his entire plan of 
campaign had been ruined by this bit of sport. Days later he went on 
railing to all and sundry about "these crazy mountain climbers" who "be- 
long before a court-martial." There they were pursuing their idiotic hob- 
bies in the midst of a war, he exclaimed indignantly, occupying an idiotic 
peak even though he had commanded that all efforts must be concentrated 
upon Sukhumi. Here was a clear example of the way his orders were 
being obeyed. 

Urgent business called me back to Berlin. A few days later the 
commander of the army group operating in the Caucasus was relieved, 
although Jodl vigorously defended him. When I returned to headquarters 
again about two weeks later, I found that Hitler had quarreled with 
Keitel, Jodl, and Haider. He refused to shake hands with them or to dine 
with them at the common table. From then on until the end of the war 
he had his meals served in his bunker room, only occasionally inviting 
a few select persons to join him. The close relations that Hitler had with 
his military associates were shattered for good. 

Was the cause merely the failure of the offensive on which he had 
placed so many hopes, or did he for the first time have an inkling that 
this was the turning point? The fact that from then on he stayed away 
from the officers' table may have been due to the fact that he would 
no longer be sitting among them as the invincible leader in peace and 
war, but as a man whose plans had come to grief. Moreover, he must by 
now have run through the stock of general ideas with which he had re- 
galed this group. Perhaps he also felt that his magic was failing him for 
the first time. 

For several weeks Keitel skulked about mournfully and displayed 
great devotion, so that Hitler soon began treating him somewhat more 
amicably. His relations with Jodl— who had characteristically remained 
impassive through it all— likewise straightened out. But General Haider, 

* One mountain division tried to push through to Tiflis by way of the Caucasian 
mountain passes, following the old military road from Grozny. Hitler considered this 
road a poor one to use for sending reinforcements, since it was blocked for months 
at a time by snow and avalanches. One group from the mountain division had gone 
off to take Mount Elbrus. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 24O 

the army chief of staff, had to go. He was a quiet, laconic man who was 
probably always thrown off by Hitler s vulgar dynamism and thus gave 
a rather hapless impression. His successor, Kurt Zeitzler, was just the 
opposite: a straighforward, insensitive person who made his reports in a 
loud voice. He was not the type of military man given to independent 
thinking and no doubt represented the kind of Chief of Staff that Hitler 
wanted: a reliable "assistant" who, as Hitler was fond of saying, "doesn't 
go off and brood on my orders, but energetically sees to carrying them 
out." With that in mind, too, Hitler probably did not pick him from the 
ranks of the higher generals. Zeitzler had up to that time held a sub- 
ordinate place in the army hierarchy; he was promoted two grades at once. 

After the appointment of the new Chief of Staff, Hitler permitted 
me— the only civilian for the time being*— to participate in the situation 
conferences. I could take this as a special proof of his satisfaction with 
me— for which he had every reason, given the constantly rising produc- 
tion figures. But this favor would probably not have been shown me if 
he had felt threatened by a loss of prestige in my presence because of 
opposition, vehement debates, and disputes. The storm had calmed 
down again; Hitler had regained his standing 

Every day around noon the grand situation conference took place. 
It lasted two to three hours. Hitler was the only one who was seated— 
on a plain armchair with a rush seat. The other participants stood around 
the map table: his adjutants, staff officers of the OKW and the Army 
General Staff, and Hitler s liaison officers to the air force, the navy, 
the Waffen-SS, and Himmler. On the whole they were rather young 
men with likable faces, most of them holding the rank of colonel or 
major. Keitel, Jodl, and Zeitzler stood casually amongst them. Some- 
times Goering came too. As a gesture of special distinction and perhaps 
in consideration of his corpulence, Hitler had an upholstered stool 
brought in for the Reich Marshal, on which he sat beside Hitler. 

Desk lamps with long, swinging arms illuminated the maps. First 
the eastern theater was discussed. Three or four strategic maps, pasted 
together, each of them about five by eight feet, were laid out on the 
long table in front of Hitler. The discussion began with the northern part 
of the eastern theater of war. Every detail of the events of the previous 
day was entered on the maps, every advance, even patrols— and almost 
every entry was explained by the Chief of Staff. Bit by bit the maps 
were pushed farther up the table, so that Hitler always had a compre- 
hensible segment within reading distance. Longer discussion was de- 
voted to the more important events, Hitler noting every change from the 

* Several months passed before Bormann and Ribbentrop received permission 
to attend. 



241 ) Commander in Chief Hitler 

status of the previous day. Just the daily preparation for this conference 
was a tremendous burden on the time of the Chief of Staff and his 
officers, who no doubt had more important things to do. As a layman 
I was astonished at the way Hitler in the course of hearing the reports 
made deployments, pushed divisions back and forth, or dealt with 
petty details. 

At least during 1942 he received the news of grave setbacks calmly. 
Or perhaps this was already the beginning of the apathy he later dis- 
played. Outwardly, at any rate, he showed no sign of despair. He 
seemed determined to present the image of the superior war lord whose 
composure nothing could shake. Frequently he stressed that his ex- 
periences in the trenches of the First World War had given him more 
insight into many details of military policy than all his military advisers 
had acquired in the General Staff school. This may well have been 
true, for certain restricted areas. In the opinion of many army officers, 
however, his very "trench perspective" had given him a false picture 
of the process of leadership. In this regard his knowledge of detail, the 
detailed knowledge of a corporal, rather hampered him. General 
Fromm commented in his laconic fashion that a civilian as commander 
in chief might have been better than, of all people, a corporal— more- 
over one who had never fought in the east and therefore could not 
conceive the special problems of warfare in this part of the world. 

Hitler practiced a policy of patchwork of the pettiest sort. More- 
over, he labored under the handicap that the nature of any given ter- 
rain cannot really be gathered adequately from maps. In the early 
summer of 1942 he personally ordered the first six of our Tiger tanks 
to be thrown into battle. As always, when a new weapon was ready, he 
expected it to turn the tide of battle. He regaled us with vivid de- 
scriptions of how the Soviet 7.7 centimeter antitank guns, which pene- 
trated our Panzer IV front armor even at sizable distances, would fire 
shot after shot in vain, and how finally the Tiger would roll over the 
antitank gun nests. His staff remonstrated that the terrain he had chosen 
made tactical deployment of the tanks impossible because of the 
marshy subsurface on both sides of the road. Hitler dismissed these 
objections, not sharply, but with a superior air. And so the first Tiger 
assault started. Everybody was tensely awaiting the results, and I was 
rather anxious, wondering whether all would go well technically. There 
was no opportunity for a technical dress rehearsal. The Russians calmly 
let the tanks roll past an antitank gun position, then fired direct hits at 
the first and last Tiger. The remaining four thereupon could move 
neither forward nor backward, nor could they take evasive action to 
the side because of the swamps, and soon they were also finished off. 
Hitler silently passed over the debacle; he never referred to it again. 

The situation in the western theater of war, at that time still cen- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 242 

tered in Africa, was taken up next by General Jodl. Here too Hitler 
tended to intervene in every detail. He was bitterly annoyed with 
Rommel, who would often give extremely unclear bulletins on the day's 
movements. In other words, he "veiled" them from headquarters, some- 
times for days, only to report an entirely changed situation. Hitler liked 
Rommel personally but could ill brook this sort of conduct. 

Properly speaking, Jodl as chief of the Wehrmacht Operations 
Staff ought to have coordinated the actions in the various theaters of 
war. But Hitler had claimed this task for himself, although he did not 
actually perform it. Basically, Jodl had no clearly defined field of ac- 
tivity. But in order to have something to do, his staff assumed inde- 
pendent leadership in certain theaters, so that in the end two rival gen- 
eral staffs existed for the army. Hitler acted as arbitrator between them 
—in keeping with that principle of divisiveness he favored. The more 
critical the situation became, the more vehemently the two rival staffs 
fought over the shifting of divisions from east to west and vice versa. 

Once the "army situation ,, had been discussed, reports of the events 
of the last twenty-four hours in the "air situation ' and the "naval situa- 
tion"— as these areas were designated— were reviewed, usually by the 
liaison officer or the adjutant for this branch of the services, rarely by 
the commander himself. Attacks on England, the bombings of German 
cities, were reported briefly, as were the latest accomplishments in sub- 
marine warfare. On questions of air and naval warfare Hitler left his 
commanders in chief the broadest freedom of choice. At least at that 
period he rarely intervened, and then only in an advisory capacity. 

Toward the end of the conference Keitel presented Hitler with 
various documents for signature. Usually these were the partly sneered- 
at, partly dreaded "covering orders"— in other words, orders intended 
to cover him or someone else against subsequent reprimands from 
Hitler. At the time I called this procedure an outrageous abuse of 
Hitler's signature, since it often meant that altogether incompatible 
ideas and plans were thereby given the form of orders, creating a con- 
fusing and impenetrable thicket of contradictions. 

The presence of so large a company in the relatively small space 
made the air stale, which quickly tired me as well as most of the others. 
A ventilation system had been installed, but Hitler thought it pro- 
duced "excessive pressure" which resulted in headaches and a feeling 
of giddiness. Therefore it was switched on only before and after the 
situation conference. Even in the finest weather the window usually 
remained closed, and even by day the curtains were drawn. These con- 
ditions created an extremely sultry atmosphere. 

I had expected respectful silence during these situation conferences 
and was therefore surprised that the officers who did not happen to be 



243 ) Commander in Chief Hitler 

participating in a report talked together freely, though in low voices. 
Frequently, the officers, showing no further consideration for Hitler's 
presence, would take seats in the group of chairs at the back of the 
room. The many marginal conversations created a constant murmur 
that would have made me nervous. But it disturbed Hitler only when 
the side conversations grew too excited and too loud. When he raised 
his head disapprovingly, however, the noise immediately subsided. 

From about the autumn of 1942 on, it became almost impossible 
to oppose Hitler on important questions, unless one went about it very 
cautiously. Outsiders had a better chance to present objections; Hitler 
would not stand for them from the group which constituted his daily 
entourage. Whenever he himself was trying to convince someone, he 
went far afield and tried as long as possible to keep the discussion on 
the plane of generalities. He would hardly allow the other person to 
say a word. If a controversial point arose in the course of the discus- 
sion, Hitler usually evaded it skillfully, postponing clarification of it to 
a subsequent conference. He proceeded on the assumption that military 
men were shy about giving in on points in front of their staff officers. 
Probably he also expected his aura and his persuasiveness to operate 
better in a face-to-face discussion with an individual. Both these ele- 
ments came across poorly over the telephone. Probably that was why 
Hitler always showed a distinct dislike for conducting important argu- 
ments on the telephone. 

In the late evening hours there was a further situation conference 
in which a younger General Staff officer reported on the developments 
of the last few hours. Hitler would sit alone with the officer. If I had 
dined with Hitler, he sometimes took me along to these reports. Un- 
doubtedly he found these occasions far more relaxing than the main 
situation conference, and the atmosphere and tone would be considerably 
less formal. 

Hitler s entourage certainly bore a measure of the blame for his 
growing belief in his superhuman abilities. Early in the game, Field 
Marshal Blomberg, Hitler's first and last Minister of War, had been 
overfond of praising Hitler's surpassing strategic genius. Even a more 
restrained and modest personality than Hitler ever was would have 
been in danger of losing all standards of self-criticism under such a 
constant torrent of applause. 

In keeping with his character, Hitler gladly sought advice from 
persons who saw the situation even more optimistically and delusively 
than he himself. Keitel was often one of those. When the majority of the 
officers would greet Hitler's decisions with marked silence, Keitel would 
frequently feel called upon to speak up in favor of the measure. Con- 
stantly in Hitler's presence, he had completely succumbed to his influ- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 244 

ence. From an honorable, solidly respectable general he had developed 
in the course of years into a servile flatterer with all the wrong instincts. 
Basically, Keitel hated his own weakness; but the hopelessness of any dis- 
pute with Hitler had ultimately brought him to the point of not even 
trying to form his own opinion. If, however, he had offered resistance 
and stubbornly insisted on a view of his own, he would merely have 
been replaced by another Keitel. 

In 1943-44 when Schmundt, Hitler s chief adjutant and army per- 
sonnel chief, tried, along with many others, to replace Keitel by the 
much more vigorous Field Marshal Kesselring, Hitler said that he could 
not do without Keitel because the man was loyal as a dog" to him. 
Perhaps Keitel embodied most precisely the type of person Hitler 
needed in his entourage. 

General Jodl, too, rarely contradicted Hitler openly. He proceeded 
diplomatically. Usually he did not express his thoughts at once, thus 
skirting difficult situations. Later he would persuade Hitler to yield, 
or even to reverse decisions already taken. His occasional deprecatory 
remarks about Hitler showed that he had preserved a relatively un- 
biased view. 

Keitel's subordinates, such as, for example, his deputy General 
Warlimont, could not be more courageous than their superior; for Keitel 
would not stand up for them against Hitler s ire. Occasionally they tried 
to counter the effects of obviously absurd orders by adding little clauses 
that Hitler did not understand. Under the leadership of a man so sub- 
missive and irresolute as Keitel, the High Command often had to look 
for all sorts of crooked paths in order to arrive at its goals. 

The subjugation of the generals might also be laid in part to their 
state of permanent fatigue. Hitler s work routine intersected the normal 
daily routine of the High Command. As a result, the generals often 
went without regular sleep. Such purely physical strains probably affect 
events more than is generally assumed, especially when high perform- 
ance over a protracted span of time is required. In private associations, 
too, Keitel and Jodl gave the impression of being exhausted, burned 
out. In order to break through this ring of hollow men, I hoped to place 
—in addition to Fromm— my friend Field Marshal Milch within the 
Fuehrers headquarters. I had taken him with me to headquarters 
several times, supposedly in order to report on activities of Central 
Planning. A few times all went well, and Milch was gaining ground 
with his plan of concentrating on a fighter-plane program instead of 
the proposed fleet of big bombers. But then Goering forbade him to 
pay any further visits to headquarters. 

Goering too gave the impression of a worn-out man at the end of 
1942, when I sat with him in the pavilion that had been built especially 
for his brief stays at headquarters. Goering still had comfortable chairs, 



2 45 ) Commander in Chief Hitler 

not the spartan furnishings of Hitlers bunker office. Depressed, the 
Reich Marshal said: "We will have reason to be glad if Germany can 
keep the boundaries of 1933 && er the war." He quickly tried to cover 
up this remark by adding a few confident banalities, but I had the im- 
pression that in spite of the bluffness he put on, he saw defeat coming 
closer. 

After his arrival at the Fuehrers headquarters, Goering usually 
withdrew to his pavilion for a few minutes while General Bodenschatz, 
his liaison officer to Hitler, left the situation conference in order to brief 
Goering by telephone, so we suspected, on certain disputed questions. 
Fifteen minutes later, Goering would enter the situation conference. Of his 
own accord he would emphatically advocate exactly the viewpoint that 
Hitler wished to put across against the opposition of his generals. Hitler 
would then look around at his entourage: "You see, the Reich Marshal 
holds exactly the same opinion as I do." 

On the afternoon of November 7, 1942, I accompanied Hitler to 
Munich in his special train. These journeys were a favorable occasion 
to draw Hitler into the necessary but time-consuming consideration of 
general armaments questions. This special train was equipped with 
radio, teletype machines, and a telephone switchboard. Jodl and some 
members of the General Staff had joined Hitler. 

The atmosphere was tense. We were already many hours late, for 
at every sizable station a prolonged stop was made in order to connect 
the telephone cable with the railroad telegraph system, so we could get 
the latest reports. From early morning on a mighty armada of trans- 
ports, accompanied by large naval units, had been passing through the 
Strait of Gibralter into the Mediterranean. 

In earlier years Hitler had made a habit of showing himself at the 
window of his special train whenever it stopped. Now these encoun- 
ters with the outside world seemed undesirable to him; instead, the 
shades on the station side of the train would be lowered. Late in the 
evening we sat with Hitler in his rosewood-paneled dining car. The table 
was elegantly set with silver flatware, cut glass, good china, and flower ar- 
rangements. As we began our ample meal, none of us at first saw that a 
freight train was stopped on the adjacent track. From the cattle car 
bedraggled, starved, and in some cases wounded German soldiers, just 
returning from the east, stared at the diners. With a start, Hitler no- 
ticed the somber scene two yards from his window. Without as much 
as a gesture of greeting in their direction, he peremptorily ordered his 
servant to draw the shades. This, then, in the second half of the war, 
was how Hitler handled a meeting with ordinary front-line soldiers 
such as he himself had once been. 

At every station along the way the number of reported naval units 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 246 

rose. An enterprise of vast proportions was obviously afoot. Finally the 
units passed through the Strait. All the ships reported by our air recon- 
naissance were now moving eastward in the Mediterranean. "This is 
the largest landing operation that has ever taken place in the history 
of the world," Hitler declared in a tone of respect, perhaps taking pride 
that he was the cause of enterprises of such magnitude. Until the fol- 
lowing morning the landing fleet remained north of the Moroccan and 
Algerian coast. 

In the course of the night Hitler proposed several different explan- 
ations for this mysterious behavior. He thought the most probable thing 
was that the enemy was undertaking a great supply operation to reinforce 
the offensive against the hard-pressed Africa Corps. The naval units were 
keeping together in this way, he concluded, in order to advance through 
the narrow strait between Sicily and Africa under cover of darkness, 
safe from German air attacks. Or else, and this second version corres- 
ponded more to his feeling for perilous military operations: "The 
enemy will land in central Italy tonight. There he would meet with no 
resistance at all. There are no German troops there, and the Italians 
will run away. That way they can cut northern Italy off from the south. 
What will become of Rommel in that case? He would be lost in a 
short time. He has no reserves and supplies will no longer come 
through." 

Hitler intoxicated himself with thoughts of far-reaching operations, 
of a kind he had long been missing. He more and more put himself 
into the position of the enemy: "I would occupy Rome at once and form 
a new Italian government. Or, and this would be the third possibility, I 
would use this great fleet to land in southern France. We have always 
been too gentle. And now this is what we get for itl No fortifications 
and no German troops at all down there. A great mistake that we have 
nothing garrisoned there. The Petain government wont put up a bit 
of resistance, of course." From moment to moment he seemed to for- 
get that these forces were gathering against himself. 

Hitler's guesses were wide of the mark. It would never have oc- 
curred to him not to associate such a landing operation with a coup. To 
put the troops on land in safe positions from which they could methodi- 
cally spread out, to take no unnecessary risks— that was a strategy alien 
to his nature. But that night he clearly realized one thing: Now the second 
front was beginning to be a reality. 

By the next day the Allied troops were pouring ashore in North 
Africa. Nevertheless, Hitler went ahead with his speech in commemora- 
tion of his failed putsch of 1923. 1 still remember how shocked we all were 
when, instead of at least referring to the gravity of the situation and 
calling for a mustering of energies, he adopted his usual "victory-is- 



247 ) Commander in Chief Hitler 

certain" tone: "They've already become idiots," he digressed about our 
enemy, whose operations had only yesterday called forth his homage, 
"if they think that they can ever shatter Germany. . . . We will not fall; 
consequently, the others will fall." 

In the late autumn of 1942, Hitler triumphantly stated in the course 
of a situation conference: "Now the Russians are sending their cadets 
into the struggle. 4 That's the surest proof they have reached the end. 
A country sacrifices the next generation of officers only when it has 
nothing left." 

A few weeks later, on November 19, 1942, the first reports of the 
great Russian winter offensive reached Hitler, who had withdrawn to 
Obersalzberg days before. The offensive, which nine weeks later was 
to lead to the capitulation of Stalingrad, 5 began near Serafinov. There, 
after violent artillery preparations, strong Soviet forces had broken 
through the positions of Rumanian divisions. Hitler tried at first to 
explain and belittle this disaster by making slurring remarks on the 
fighting qualities of his allies. But shortly afterward the Soviet troops 
began overwhelming German divisions as well. The front was begin- 
ning to crumble. 

Hitler paced back and forth in the great hall of the Berghof. 

Our generals are making their old mistakes again. They always over- 
estimate the strength of the Russians. According to all the front-line reports, 
the enemy's human material is no longer sufficient. They are weakened; they 
have lost far too much blood. But of course nobody wants to accept such 
reports. Besides, how badly Russian officers are trained! No offensive can 
be organized with such officers. We know what it takes! In the short or 
long run the Russians will simply come to a halt. They'll run down. Mean- 
while we shall throw in a few fresh divisions; that will put things right. 

In the peaceful atmosphere of the Berghof he simply did not understand 
what was brewing. But three days later, when the bad news kept pouring 
in, he rushed back to East Prussia. 

A few days afterward at Rastenburg the strategic map showed the 
area from Voronezh to Stalingrad covered with red arrows across a 
front a hundred and twenty-five miles wide. These represented the thrust 
of the Soviet troops. Among all the arrows were small blue circles, 
pockets of resistance by the remnants of German and allied divisions. 
Stalingrad was already surrounded by red rings. Disturbed, Hitler now 
commanded units to be detached from all other sectors of the front and 
from the occupied territories and dispatched in all haste to the southern 
sector. No operational reserve was available, although General Zeitzler 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 248 

had pointed out long before the emergency that each of the divisions in 
southern Russia had to defend a frontal sector of unusual length* and 
would not be able to cope with a vigorous assault by Soviet troops. 

Stalingrad was encircled. Zeitzler, his face flushed and haggard 
from lack of sleep, insisted that the Sixth Army must break out to the 
west. He deluged Hitler with data on all that the army lacked, both as 
regards to rations and fuel, so that it had become impossible to pro- 
vide warm meals for the soldiers exposed to fierce cold in the snow- 
swept fields or the scanty shelter of ruins. Hitler remained calm, un- 
moved and deliberate, as if bent on showing that Zeitzlers agitation 
was a psychotic reaction in the face of danger. "The counterattack from 
the south that I have ordered will soon relieve Stalingrad. That will 
recoup the situation. We have been in such positions often before, you 
know. In the end we always had the problem in hand again." He gave 
orders for supply trains to be dispatched right behind the troops de- 
ploying for the counteroffensive, so that as soon as Stalingrad was re- 
lieved something could at once be done about alleviating the plight of 
the soldiers. Zeitzler disagreed, and Hitler let him talk without inter- 
rupting. The forces provided for the counterattack were too weak, 
Zeitzler said. But if they could unite successfully with a Sixth Army 
that had broken out to the west, they would then be able to establish 
new positions farther to the south. Hitler offered counterarguments, but 
Zeitzler held to his view. Finally, after the discussion had gone on for 
more than half an hour, Hitlers patience snapped: "Stalingrad simply 
must be held. It must be; it is a key position. By breaking traffic on the 
Volga at that spot, we cause the Russians the greatest difficulties. How 
are they going to transport their grain from southern Russia to the 
north?" That did not sound convincing; I had the feeling, rather, that 
Stalingrad was a symbol for him. But for the time being the discussion 
ended after this dispute. 

Next day the situation had worsened. Zeitzlers pleas had grown even 
more urgent; the atmosphere in the situation conference was somber; 
and even Hitler looked exhausted and downcast. Once he too spoke of 
a breakout. Once more he asked for figures on how many tons of sup- 
plies were needed daily to maintain the fighting strength of over two 
hundred thousand soldiers. 

Twenty-four hours later the fate of the encircled army was finally 
sealed. For Goering appeared in the situation room, brisk and beaming 
like an operetta tenor who is supposed to portray a victorious Reich 
Marshal. Depressed, with a beseeching note in his voice, Hitler asked 
him: "What about supplying Stalingrad by air?" Goering snapped to 

* Establishing the new line of defense, Orel-Stalingrad-Terek River-Maikop, 
meant that the troops had to defend a line 2.3 times longer than the Orel-Black Sea 
position taken in the spring 



249 ) Commander in Chief Hitler 

attention and declared solemnly: "My leader! I personally guarantee 
the supplying of Stalingrad by air. You can rely on that." As I later 
heard from Milch, the Air Force General Staff had in fact calculated 
that supplying the pocket was impossible. Zeitzler, too, instantly voiced 
his doubts. But Goering retorted that it was exclusively the business of 
the air force to undertake the necessary calculations. Hitler, who could 
be so pedantic about erecting edifices of figures, on this day did not 
even ask for an accounting of how the necessary planes could be made 
available. He had revived at Goering's mere words, and had recovered 
his old staunchness. "Then Stalingrad can be held! It is foolish to go on 
talking any more about a breakout of the Sixth Army. It would lose all 
its heavy weapons and have no fighting strength left. The Sixth Army 
remains in Stalingrad!"* 

Although Goering knew that the fate of the army encircled in 
Stalingrad hung on his promise, on December 12, 1942, 6 he issued in- 
vitations to his subordinates to attend a festive performance of Richard 
Wagner s Die Meistersinger to celebrate the reopening of the destroyed 
Berlin State Opera House. In gala uniforms or full dress we took our 
seats in the Fuehrers big box. The jovial plot of the opera painfully 
contrasted with the events at the front, so that I kept chiding myself for 
having accepted the invitation. 

A few days later I was back at the Fuehrer s headquarters. Zeitzler 
was now giving a daily report on the tons of rations and munitions the 
Sixth Army was receiving by air. They came to only a fraction of the 
promised quantities. Goering, repeatedly called to account by Hitler, 
had excuses: The weather was bad, fog, freezing rain, or snowstorms 
had so far prevented commitment of as many planes as planned. But 
as soon as the weather changed, Goering said, he would be able to de- 
liver the promised tonnage. 

Thereupon, food rations had to be reduced still further in Stalin- 
grad. Zeitzler conspicuously had himself served the same rations in the 
General Staff casino, and visibly lost weight. After a few days of this 
Hitler informed him that he considered it improper for a chief of staff 
to wear out his nerves with such demonstrations of solidarity with the 
troops. He commanded Zeitzler to resume at once taking sufficient 
nourishment. However, for a few weeks Hitler prohibited the serving 
of champagne and cognac. The mood became blacker and blacker. 
Faces froze into masks. Often we stood about in silence. No one wanted 
to talk about the gradual destruction of what had been, only a few 
months before, a victorious army. 

But Hitler went on hoping; he was still hoping when I once more 

* Later experience with battles fought in winter by the retreating armies belies 
Hitler's theory, since adopted by some historians, that the Stalingrad pocket served 
its purpose because it tied up the Soviet forces for eight weeks. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 250 

was at headquarters from January 2 to 7. The counterattack he had 
ordered, which was supposed to break the ring around Stalingrad and 
bring fresh supplies to the dying army, had failed two weeks before. 
The sole remaining hope, and that a faint one, lay in a decision to evacu- 
ate the pocket. 

One day, while I waited outside the situation room, I heard Zeitz- 
ler urging Keitel, literally begging him, on this day at least to support 
him in persuading Hitler to give the order for evacuation. This was the 
last moment to avert a fearful catastrophe, Zeitzler said. Keitel em- 
phatically agreed and solemnly promised Zeitzler that he would help 
as requested. But at the situation conference, when Hitler once again 
stressed the necessity of holding out in Stalingrad, Keitel strode emo- 
tionally toward him, pointed to the map, where a small remnant of the 
city was surrounded by thick red rings, and declared: "Mein Fuhrer, we 
will hold that!" 

In this hopeless situation, on January 15, 1943, Hitler signed a spe- 
cial decree giving Field Marshal Milch the power to take all measures 
in the air force and the civilian air fleet that he considered necessary 
for supplying Stalingrad— without asking Goering's permission.* At the 
time I telephoned Milch several times, for he had promised me to 
rescue my brother, who was caught with the rest of the encircled troops 
in Stalingrad. In the general confusion, however, it proved impossible 
to locate him. Desperate letters came from him. He had jaundice and 
swollen limbs, was taken to a field hospital, but could not endure con- 
ditions there and dragged himself back to his comrades at an artillery 
observation post. After that nothing more was heard from him. What 
my parents and I went through was repeated by hundreds of thousands 
of f amilies who for a time continued to receive airmail letters from the 
encircled city, until it was all over.** In the future Hitler never said an- 
other word about the catastrophe for which he and Goering were alone 
responsible. Instead, he commanded the immediate formation of a new 
Sixth Army which was supposed to restore the glory of the doomed one. 
A year and a half later, in the middle of August 1944, it too was encircled 
by the Russians and annihilated. 

Our enemies rightly regarded this disaster at Stalingrad as a turning 

* Milch directed this operation from the air force headquarters south of Stalin- 
grad. He was able to increase the flights to Stalingrad appreciably, so that at least 
some of the wounded could be evacuated. After performing his mission, Milch was 
received by Hitler. Their conversation ended in a violent clash over the desperate 
military situation, whose seriousness Hitler still refused to acknowledge. 

** Hitler could not have blocked delivery of these letters without causing wild 
rumors. But when the Soviet Army allowed German prisoners to send home postcards, 
Hitler ordered the cards destroyed. Because they were a sign of life from the rela- 
tives, they might have mitigated the Russophobia that was being so carefully cultivated 
by Hitler's propaganda apparatus. Fritzsche told me about this at Nuremberg. 



251 ) Commander in Chief Hitler 

point in the war. But at Hitler's headquarters the only reaction was a 
temporary numbness followed by a rush of feverish staff work in which 
the most trivial details were threshed over. Hitler began conceiving plans 
for new victories in 1943. The top leadership of the Reich, already torn 
by dissension and filled with envy and jealousy, did not close ranks in 
the face of the peril that was almost upon us. On the contrary, in that 
den of intrigue which Hitler had created by splitting all the centers of 
power, the gamblers began playing for higher stakes than ever before. 



i8 

Intrigues 



In the winter of 1942, during the STALINGRAD crisis, bormann, kettel, 
and Lammers decided to close their own ring around Hitler more 
tightly. Henceforth, all orders to be signed by the Chief of State had 
to be cleared through these three men. This would supposedly prevent 
the unconsidered signing of decrees and therefore put a stop to the 
command confusion caused by this practice. Hitler was content so long 
as he retained the final decision. Henceforth, the divergent views of 
various branches of government would be "sifted" by this Committee of 
Three. In accepting this arrangement Hitler counted on objective pres- 
entation and a nonpartisan method of working. 

The three-man committee divided up its jurisdictions. Keitel, who 
was to be in charge of all orders relating to the armed forces, came to 
grief right from the start, since the commanders in chief of the air force 
and the navy utterly refused to accept his authority. All changes in 
the powers of the ministries, all constitutional affairs, and all admin- 
istrative questions were supposed to go through Lammers. As it turned 
out, however, he had to leave these decisions more and more to Bor- 
mann, since he himself had little access to Hitler. Bormann had reserved 
the field of domestic policy for himself. But he not only lacked the in- 
telligence for these matters; he also had insufficient knowledge of the 
outside world. For more than eight years he had been little more than 

( *5* ) 



2 53 ) Intrigues 

Hitler s shadow. He had never dared go on any lengthy business trips, 
or even to allow himself a vacation, for fear that his influence might di- 
minish. From his own days as Hess's deputy, Bormann knew the perils 
of ambitious deputies. For Hitler was all too ready to treat the second 
men in an organization, as soon as they were presented to him, as mem- 
bers of his staff and to make assignments directly to them. This quirk 
accorded with his tendency to divide power wherever he encountered 
it. Moreover, he loved to see new faces, to try out new persons. In order 
to avoid raising up such a rival in his own household, many a minister 
took care not to appoint an intelligent and vigorous deputy. 

The plan of these three men to surround Hitler, to filter his infor- 
mation and thus control his power, might have led to an abridgement 
of Hitler's one-man rule— had the Committee of Three consisted of men 
possessing initiative, imagination, and a sense of responsibility. But 
since they had been trained always to act in Hitlers name, they slav- 
ishly depended on the expressions of his will. What is more, Hitler soon 
stopped abiding by this regulation. It became a nuisance to him, and 
was, moreover, contrary to his temperament. But it is understandable 
that those who stood outside this ring resented its stranglehold. 

In fact Bormann was now assuming a role which could be danger- 
ous to the top functionaries. He alone, with Hitler's compliance, drew 
up the appointments calendar, which meant that he decided which 
civilian members of the government or party could see, or more im- 
portant, could not see, the Fuehrer. By now, hardly any of the ministers, 
Reichsleiters, or Gauleiters could penetrate to Hitler. They all had to 
ask Bormann to present their programs to him. Bormann was very ef- 
ficient. Usually the official in question received an answer in writing 
within a few days, whereas in the past he would have had to wait for 
months. I was one of the exceptions to this rule. Since my sphere was 
military in nature, I had access to Hitler whenever I wished. Hitler s 
military adjutants were the ones who set up my appointments. 

After my conferences with Hitler, it sometimes happened that the 
adjutant would announce Bormann, who would then come into the 
room carrying his files. In a few sentences he would report on the mem- 
oranda sent to him. He spoke monotonously and with seeming objec- 
tivity and would then advance his own solution. Usually Hitler merely 
nodded and spoke his terse, "Agreed." On the basis of this one word, or 
even a vague comment by Hitler, which was hardly meant as a direc- 
tive, Bormann would often draft lengthy instructions. In this way ten 
or more important decisions were sometimes made within half an hour. 
De facto, Bormann was conducting the internal affairs of the Reich. A 
few months afterward, on April 12, 1943, Bormann obtained Hitler's sig- 
nature to a seemingly unimportant piece of paper. He became "Secretary 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 254 

to the Fuehrer." Whereas previously his powers, strictly speaking, should 
have been restricted to party affairs, this new position now authorized 
him to act officially in any field he wished. 

After my first major achievements in the field of armaments, Goeb- 
bels's hostility toward me, apparent ever since his affair with Lida 
Baarova, gave way to good will. In the summer of 1942, 1 had asked him 
to put his propaganda apparatus to work to speed armaments produc- 
tion. Newsreels, picture magazines, and newspapers were required to 
publish articles on the subject. My prestige rose. Thanks to this direc- 
tive by the Propaganda Minister, I became one of the best-known per- 
sonages in the Reich. This improvement in my status in its turn was 
useful to my associates in their daily bouts with government and party 
bureaus. 

All of Goebbels's speeches sounded the note of stereotyped fanati- 
cism, but it would be quite wrong to think of him as a hot-blooded man 
seething with temperament. Goebbels was a hard worker and some- 
thing of a martinet about the way his ideas were carried out. But he 
never let the minutiae make him lose sight of the whole situation. He 
had the gift of abstracting problems from their surrounding circum- 
stances so that, as it seemed to me then, he could arrive at objective 
judgments. I was impressed by his cynicism, but also by the logical 
arrangement of his ideas, which revealed his university training. To- 
ward Hitler, however, he seemed extremely constrained. 

During the first, successful phase of the war, Goebbels had shown 
no signs of ambition. On the contrary, as early as 1940 he expressed his 
intention of devoting himself to his many personal interests once the 
war was brought to a victorious conclusion. It would then be time for 
the next generation to assume responsibility, he would say. 

In December 1942 the disastrous course of affairs prompted him 
to invite three of his colleagues to call on him more often: Walther Funk, 
Robert Ley, and myself. The choice was typical of Goebbels, for we 
were all men of academic background, university graduates. 

Stalingrad had shaken us— not only the tragedy of the Sixth Army's 
soldiers, but even more, perhaps, the question of how such a disaster 
could have taken place under Hitler's orders. For hitherto there had 
always been a success to offset every setback; hitherto there Had been a 
new triumph to compensate for all losses or at least make everyone for- 
get them. Now for the first time we had suffered a defeat for which 
there was no compensation. 

In one of our discussions at the beginning of 1943, Goebbels made 
the point that we had had great military successes at the beginning of 
the war while taking only half-measures inside the Reich. Consequent- 
ly, we had thought we could go on being victorious without great ef- 



*55 ) Intrigues 

forts. The British, on the other hand, had been luckier in that Dunkirk 
had taken place right at the beginning of the war. This defeat had made 
them aware of the need to tighten up on the civilian economy. Now 
Stalingrad was our Dunkirk! The war could no longer be won simply 
by engendering confidence. 

In speaking this way Goebbels was referring to the information he 
had from his band of correspondents concerning the uneasiness and 
dissatisfaction among the populace. The public was actually demanding 
a ban on all luxuries, which did not help the national struggle. In gen- 
eral, Goebbels said, he could sense a great readiness among the people 
to exert themselves to the utmost. In fact, significant restrictions were a 
real necessity if only to revive popular confidence in the leadership. 

From the viewpoint of armaments, considerable sacrifices were 
certainly required. Hitler had demanded a step-up in production. What 
was more, in order to compensate for the tremendous casualties on the 
eastern front, eight hundred thousand of the younger skilled workers 
were going to be drafted. 1 Every subtraction of the German labor force 
would add to the difficulties all our factories were encountering. 

On the other hand, the air raids had shown that life could continue 
on an orderly basis in the severely affected cities. Tax revenues for in- 
stance went on being paid even after bombs falling on Treasury offices 
had destroyed the documents. Taking my cue directly from the princi- 
ple of self -responsibility in industry, I formulated a program which would 
substitute trust for distrust toward the populace and allow us to trim 
/our supervisory and administrative agencies, which alone employed 
I nearly three million persons. We considered ways in which the tax- 
payers could be made responsible for their own declarations, or the 
feasibility of not reassessing liability at all, or for withholding taxes 
from the payrolls. Given the billions being spent on the war every 
month, Goebbels and I argued, what did it matter if a few hundred 
millions were lost to the government due to the dishonesty of some 
individuals. 

A considerably greater stir was created by my demands that the 
working time of all government officials be extended to match the hours 
of armaments workers. That alone, in purely arithmetical terms, would 
have freed some two hundred thousand administrative people for arm- 
aments work. Furthermore, I wanted to release several hundreds of 
thousands of workers by a drastic cut in the living standard of the up- 
per classes. At a meeting of Central Planning, I made no attempt to 
gloss over the effect my radical proposals would have on the German 
scene: "This means that for the duration of the war, if it goes on for a 
long time, we shall be— to put it crudely— proletarianized." 2 Today, I 
am glad that my plan did not win acceptance. Had it, Germany would 
have faced the extraordinary burdens of the early postwar months eco- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 256 

nomically even more weakened and administratively more disorganized. 
But I am also convinced that in England, for example— had she been 
facing the same situation— such proposals would have been consistently 
carried out. 

We had a hard time persuading a hesitant Hitler that certain austeri- 
ties were essential, that the administrative apparatus had to be enormously 
simplified, consumption checked, and cultural activities restricted. But 
my proposal that Goebbels handle all this was thwarted by an alert Bor- 
mann, who feared an increase in power on the part of this rival. Instead 
of Goebbels, Dr. Lammers, Bormann's ally in the Committee of Three, 
was assigned the task. He was a government official without initiative or 
imagination whose hair stood on end at the thought of such disregard for 
the sacred bureaucratic procedures. 

It was also Lammers who from January 1943 on presided over the 
Cabinet meetings, which were then resumed, in Hitler's stead. Not all 
members of the Cabinet were invited, only those who were concerned 
with the subjects on the agenda. But the meeting place, the Cabinet Room, 
showed what power the Committee of Three had acquired or at any 
rate intended to acquire. 

These meetings turned out quite heated. Goebbels and Funk sup- 
ported my radical views. Minister of the Interior Frick, as well as Lam- 
mers himself, raised the anticipated doubts. Sauckel maintained that 
he could provide any number of workers requested of him, including 
skilled personnel, from abroad. 3 Even when Goebbels demanded that 
leading party members forgo their previous, almost limitless luxuries, 
he could change nothing. And Eva Braun, ordinarily so unassuming, 
had no sooner heard of a proposed ban on permanent waves as well as 
the end of cosmetic production when she rushed to Hitler in high indig- 
nation. Hitler at once showed uncertainty. He advised me that instead 
of an outright ban I quietly stop production of "hair dyes and other 
items necessary for beauty culture," as well as "cessation of repairs 
upon apparatus for producing permanent waves."* 

After a few meetings in the Chancellery it was clear to Goebbels 
and me that armaments production would receive no spur from Bor- 
mann, Lammers, or Keitel. Our efforts had bogged down in meaning- 
less details. 

On February 18, 1943, Goebbels delivered his speech in the Sport- 
palast on "total war." It was not only directed to the population; it was 

Even Goebbels wavered on the question of cosmetics: "A whole series of in- 
dividual points are still being debated [by the public], especially the question of fem- 
inine beauty care. . . . Perhaps in this case we ought to be somewhat more lenient." 
(Diary entry for March 12, 1943.) Hitler's recommendation may be found in the 
FiihrerprotokoU, April 25, i943> Point 14. 



257 ) Intrigues 

obliquely addressed to the leadership which had ignored all our pro- 
posals for a radical commitment of domestic reserves. Basically, it was 
an attempt to place Lammers and all the other dawdlers under the pres- 
sure of the mob. 

Except for Hitlers most successful public meetings, I had never 
seen an audience so effectively roused to fanaticism. Back in his home, 
Goebbels astonished me by analyzing what had seemed to be a purely 
emotional outburst in terms of its psychological effects— much as an 
experienced actor might have done. He was also satisfied with his au- 
dience that evening. "Did you notice? They reacted to the smallest nu- 
ance and applauded at just the right moments. It was the politically 
best-trained audience you can find in Germany." This particular crowd 
had been rounded up out of the party organizations; among those pres- 
ent were popular intellectuals and actors like Heinrich George whose 
applause was caught by the newsreel cameras for the benefit of the 
wider public. 

But this speech by Goebbels also had a foreign-policy aspect. It 
was one of several attempts to supplement Hitler's purely military ap- 
proach by introducing politics. Goebbels at any rate thought that he 
was also pleading with the West to remember the danger which threat- 
ened all of Europe from the East. A few days later he expressed great 
satisfaction that the Western press had commented favorably upon 
these very sentences. 

At the time, as a matter of fact, Goebbels seemed interested in be- 
coming Foreign Minister. With all the eloquence at his command he 
tried to turn Hitler against Ribbentrop and for a while seemed to be 
succeeding. At least Hitler listened in silence to his arguments, without 
shifting the conversation to a less unpleasant subject, as was his habit. 
Goebbels already thought the game was won when Hitler unexpectedly 
began praising Ribbentrop's excellent work and his talent for negoti- 
ations with Germany's "allies." He concluded finally with the remark- 
able statement: "You're altogether wrong about Ribbentrop. He is one 
of the greatest men we have, and history will some day place him above 
Bismarck. He is greater than Bismarck." Along with this, Hitler for- 
bade Goebbels to extend any more feelers toward the West, as he had 
done in his Sportpalast speech. 

Nevertheless, Goebbels's speech on "total war" was followed up 
by a gesture which was roundly applauded by the public: He had 
Berlin's luxury restaurants and expensive places of amusement closed. 
Goering, to be sure, promptly interposed his bulk to protect his favorite 
restaurant, Horcher's. But when subsequently some demonstrators (set 
on by Goebbels) appeared at the restaurant and smashed the windows, 
Goering yielded. The result was a serious rift between him and Goebbels. 

On the evening after the speech in the Sportpalast mentioned above, 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 258 

many prominent persons assembled in the palatial residence that Goebbels 
had built shortly before the beginning of the war near the Brandenburg 
Gate. Among those present were Field Marshal Milch, Minister of Justice 
Thierack, State Secretary Stuckart of the Ministry of the Interior, 
Goering's right-hand man, State Secretary Korner, and Funk and Ley. 
For the first time a motion proposed by Milch and myself was discussed: 
to use Goering's powers as "Chairman of the Council of Ministers for the 
Defense of the Reich" in order to stiffen the home front. 

Nine days later Goebbels invited me to his home again, together 
with Funk and Ley. The huge building with its rich appointments now 
gave a gloomy appearance. In order to provide a good example of acting 
in the spirit of "total war," Goebbels had had the large public rooms 
closed and most of the electric bulbs removed in the remaining halls 
and rooms. We were asked into one of the smaller rooms, perhaps four 
hundred fifty square feet in area. Servants in livery served French cognac 
and tea; then Goebbels signaled to them to leave us undisturbed. 

"Things cannot go on this way," he began. "Here we are sitting in 
Berlin. Hitler does not hear what we have to say about the situation. I 
cannot influence him politically, cannot even report the most urgent 
measures in my area. Everything goes through Bormann. Hitler must be 
persuaded to come to Berlin more often." 

Domestic policy, Goebbels continued, had slipped entirely out of 
Hitler s hands. It was being controlled by Bormann, who managed to give 
Hitler the feeling that he was still directing things. Bormann, Goebbels 
said further, was guided only by ambition; with his rigidly doctrinaire 
approach, he represented a great danger to any sane evolution of policy. 
First and foremost his influence must be diminished! 

Altogether contrary to his habit, Goebbels did not even except 
Hitler from his critical remarks. "We are not having a leadership crisis/ 
but strictly speaking a 'Leader crisis'!" 4 To Goebbels, a born politician, it 
was incomprehensible that Hitler should have abandoned politics, that 
most important of instruments, in favor of playing a superfluous role as 
Commander in Chief. 

The rest of us could only agree; none of us could hold a candle to 
Goebbels where political instinct was concerned. His criticism showed 
what Stalingrad really meant. Goebbels had begun to doubt Hitlers star, 
and hence his victory— and we were doubting with him. 

I repeated the proposal we had made: that Goering be reinstalled 
in the function that had been intended for him at the beginning of the 
war. Here was an organizational position equipped with the fullest 
powers, including the right to issue decrees even without Hitler's col- 
laboration. From this post the power usurped by Bormann and Lammers 
could be shattered. Bormann and Lammers would have to bow to this 
existing authority whose potentialities had so far gone untapped because 
of Goering's indolence. 



259 ) Intrigues 

Since Goebbels and Goering were on bad terms because of the 
Horcher's Restaurant incident,* the group asked me to speak with Goering 
about the matter. 

The present-day reader may well wonder why, when we were making 
a last effort to rally all our forces, our choice should have fallen on this 
man who had done nothing but loll about in apathetic luxury for years. 
Goering had not always been this way, and his reputation of an admittedly 
violent but also energetic and intelligent person still lingered on from the 
days when he had built up the air force and the Four- Year Plan. There 
seemed a chance that if a task appealed to him he might recover some 
of his old daring and energy. And if not, we reckoned, then the com- 
mittee of the Reich Defense Council would in any case constitute an 
instrument that could make radical decisions. 

Only in retrospect do I realize that stripping Bormann and Lammers 
of power would hardly have changed the course of events. For the shift 
in direction we wanted to bring about could not be achieved by over- 
throwing Hitlers secretaries but solely by turning against Hitler himself. 
For us, however, that was beyond imagination. Instead, if we had suc- 
ceeded in restoring our personal positions which were endangered by 
Bormann, we would presumably have been ready to follow Hitler even 
more loyally than before, if possible; more so than we actually did under 
the cowardly Lammers and the scheming Bormann. The fact that we re- 
garded minimal differences as so important merely shows in how closed 
a world we all moved. 

This was the first time I emerged from my reserve as a specialist 
to plunge into political maneuvering. I had always carefully avoided 
such a step; but the fact that I took it now had a certain logic. I had 
decided that it was wrong to imagine I could concentrate exclusively 
upon my specialized work. In an authoritarian system anyone who wants 
to remain part of the leadership inevitably stumbles into fields of force 
where political battles are in progress. 

Goering was staying in his summer house at Obersalzberg. As I 
learned from Field Marshal Milch, he had deliberately withdrawn there 
for a rather long vacation because he was offended by Hitler's criticisms 
of his leadership of the air force. I went to see him the day after our 
meeting, February 28, 1943. He was prepared at once to receive me. 

The atmosphere of our discussion, which lasted for many hours, was 
friendly and unconstrained, in keeping with the intimate conditions of 
the relatively small house. I was astonished, though, by his lacquered 
fingernails and obviously rouged face, although the oversize ruby 

* The dispute between Goebbels and Goering over the restaurant was resolved 
as follows: The restaurant remained closed as a public restaurant, but it reopened 
as a club for the Luftwaffe. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 260 

brooch on his green velvet dressing gown was already a familiar sight 
to me. 

Goering listened quietly to our proposal and to my report of our 
Berlin conference. As he sat he occasionally scooped a handful of unset 
gems from his pocket and playfully let them glide through his fingers. 
It seemed to delight him that we had thought of him. He too saw the 
danger in the way things were going with Bormann and agreed with our 
plans. But he was still angry with Goebbels because of the Horcher 
incident, until I finally proposed that he personally invite the Propa- 
ganda Minister here, so that we could thoroughly discuss our plan with 
him. 

Goebbels came to Berchtesgaden the very next day. I first informed 
him of the result of my discussion. Together, we drove to Goering*s, 
where I soon withdrew to let the two men, whose relations had been al- 
most continually strained, have it out. When I was called in again, 
Goering rubbed his hands with delight at the prospect of the struggle 
that was about to begin and showed his most engaging side. First of all, 
he said, the personnel of the Council of Ministers for the Defense of the 
Reich must be broadened. Goebbels and I ought to become members; the 
fact that we were not, by the way, indicated that the council was of 
little importance. 

There was also talk about the necessity for replacing Ribbentrop. 
The Foreign Minister should be persuading Hitler to adopt a rational 
policy, but instead he was too much Hitler s mouthpiece to find a political 
solution for our sorry military predicament. 

Growing more and more excited, Goebbels continued: "The Fuehrer 
has not seen through Lammers any more than he has seen through 
Ribbentrop." 

Goering sprang to his feet. "He's always putting in a word edgewise, 
torpedoing me below the water line. But that's ending right now! I'm 
going to see to it, gentlemen!" 

Goebbels was obviously relishing Goering's rage and deliberately 
trying to spur him on, while at the same time fearing some rash act 
on the part of the tactically unskilled Reich Marshal. "Depend on it, 
Herr Goering, we are going to open the Fuehrer's eyes about Bormann 
and Lammers. Only we mustn't risk going too far. We'll have to proceed 
slowly. You know the Fuehrer." His caution increased as he spoke: "At 
any rate we had better not talk too openly with the other members of 
the Council of Ministers. There's no need for them to know that we 
intend to slowly spike the Committee of Three. We're simply acting out 
of loyalty to the Fuehrer. We have no personal ambitions. But if each 
one of us supports the others to the Fuehrer we'll soon be on top of the 
situation and can form a solid fence around the Fuehrer." 

Goebbels was highly pleased by the time he left. "This is going to 



261 ) Intrigues 

work," he said to me. "Goering has really come to life again, don t you 
think?" 

I too had not seen Goering so dynamic and bold in recent years. On 
a long walk in the peaceful vicinity of Obersalzberg, Goering and I 
discussed the course Bormann had taken. Goering maintained that 
Bormann was aiming at nothing less than the succession to Hitler, and 
that he would stop at nothing to outmaneuver him, Goering— in fact, 
all of us— in influencing Hitler. I took occasion to tell Goering how 
Bormann seized every opportunity to undermine the Reich Marshal's 
prestige. Goering listened with mounting feeling as I spoke of the tea- 
times with Hitler at Obersalzberg, from which Goering was excluded. 
There I had been able to observe Bormann s tactics at close vantage. 

He never worked by direct attack, I said. Instead, he would weave 
little incidents into his conversation which were effective only in their 
sum. Thus, for example, in the course of the teatime chatter Bormann 
would tell unfavorable anecdotes from Vienna in order to damage Baldur 
von Schirach, the Hitler Youth leader. But Bormann carefully avoided 
agreeing with Hitler's subsequent negative remarks. On the contrary, he 
thought it prudent to praise Schirach afterward— the kind of praise, of 
course, which would leave an unpleasant aftertaste. After about a year 
of this sort of thing Bormann had brought Hitler to the point of disliking 
Schirach and often feeling outright hostility toward him. Then— when 
Hitler was not around— Bormann could venture to go a step further. With 
an air of casually dismissing the matter but in reality annihilating the 
man, he would remark contemptuously that of course Schirach belonged 
in Vienna since everybody there was always intriguing against everybody 
else. Bormann would be playing the same sort of game against Goering, 
I added in conclusion. 

The trouble was that Goering was an easy mark for this sort of thing. 
In the course of these days at Obersalzberg, Goebbels himself spoke 
somewhat apologetically of the "baroque garments" Goering favored 
which did seem rather comical to anyone who did not know the Reich 
Marshal. And then Goering continued to comport himself with sovereign 
dignity, forgetful of his failures as Commander in Chief of the Air Force. 
Much later, in the spring of 1945, when Hitler publicly insulted his 
Reich Marshal in the most cutting manner before all the participants 
in the situation conference, Goering remarked to Below, Hitler's air force 
adjutant: "Speer was right when he warned me. Now Bormann has 
succeeded." 

Goering was mistaken. Bormann had already done his work by the 
spring of 1943. 

A few days later, on March 5, 1943, I flew to headquarters to obtain 
several decisions on armaments questions from Hitler. My chief purpose, 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 262 

however, was to promote our little plot. I found it easy to persuade Hitler 
to invite Goebbels to headquarters. Things were especially dreary, and 
he looked forward to a visit from the sprightly, clever Propaganda 
Minister. 

Three days later Goebbels arrived at headquarters. He first took 
me aside. "What is the Fuehrer's mood, Herr Speer?" he asked. I had 
to tell him that Hitler was not feeling particularly warm toward Goering 
at this juncture and advised restraint. It would probably be better not to 
press the matter right now, I thought. Consequently, after briefly feeling 
my way, I had done nothing further. Goebbels agreed: "You're probably 
right. At the moment we had better not mention Goering to the Fuehrer. 
That would spoil everything." 

The massed Allied air raids, which had been going on for weeks 
and meeting almost no opposition, had further weakened Goering's 
already imperiled position. If Goering's name was as much as mentioned, 
Hitler would start fuming at the mistakes and omissions in the planning 
for air warfare. That very day Hitler had repeatedly exclaimed that 
if the bombings went on not only would the cities be destroyed, but the 
morale of the people would crack irreparably. Hitler was succumbing to 
the same error as the British strategists on the other side who were order- 
ing mass bombing. 

Hitler invited Goebbels and me to lunch. Oddly enough, on such 
occasions he refrained from asking Bormann— who was otherwise indis- 
pensable—to join him. In this respect he treated Bormann entirely as a 
secretary. Enlivened by Goebbels, Hitler became considerably more talka- 
tive than I was accustomed to seeing him on my visits to headquarters. He 
used the opportunity to unburden his mind and as usual made disparaging 
remarks about almost all of his associates except those of us who were 
present. 

After the meal I was dismissed, and Hitler spent several hours alone 
with Goebbels. The fact that Hitler courteously and amicably showed me 
out corresponded with his way of sharply separating individuals and 
areas. I did not return until it was time for the military situation con- 
ference. At supper we met again, this time all three of us. Hitler had a 
fire made in the fireplace; the orderly brought us a bottle of wine, and 
Fachinger mineral water for Hitler. We sat up until early morning in a 
relaxed, almost cozy atmosphere. I did not have a chance to say much, for 
Goebbels knew how to entertain Hitler: He spoke brilliantly, in polished 
phrases, with irony at the right place and admiration where Hitler ex- 
pected it, with sentimentality when the moment and the subject required 
it, with gossip and love affairs. He mixed everything in a masterly brew: 
theater, movies, and old times. But Hitler also listened with eager interest 
—as always— to a detailed account of the children of the Goebbels family. 
Their childish remarks, their favorite games, their frequently pungent 
comments, distracted Hitler from his cares that night. 



263 ) Intrigues 

By recalling earlier periods of difficulty which one way or another 
had been overcome, Goebbels contrived to strengthen Hitler's self- 
assurance and to flatter his vanity, which the sober tone of the military 
men hardly pampered. Hitler, for his part, reciprocated by magnifying his 
Propaganda Minister s achievements and thus giving him cause for pride. 
In general the leaders of the Third Reich were fond of mutual praise and 
were continually reassuring one another. 

In spite of certain qualms, Goebbels and I had agreed beforehand 
that somewhere in the course of the evening we would bring up our plans 
for activating the Council of Ministers for the Defense of the Reich, 
or at least drop some hints about it. The atmosphere certainly seemed 
favorable— though there was always the danger that Hitler might take 
such suggestions as a criticism of the way he was running things— when 
suddenly this idyll at the fireplace was interrupted by the report of a heavy 
air raid on Nuremberg. As if he had guessed our intention— perhaps, too, 
he had been warned by Bormann— Hitler put on a scene such as I had 
seldom witnessed. He immediately had Brigadier General Bodenschatz, 
Goering's chief adjutant, hauled out of bed and brought before him, where 
the poor man had to take a terrible tongue-lashing on behalf of the 
"incompetent Reich Marshal." Goebbels and I tried to soothe Hitler, and 
finally he did calm down. But all our spadework had obviously been in 
vain. Goebbels, too, thought it advisable to give the subject wide berth 
for the present. Nevertheless, after Hitler's many expressions of apprecia- 
tion he felt that his political stock had risen considerably. Afterward, he 
no longer spoke of a "Leader crisis." On the contrary, it even seemed as 
if he had recovered his old confidence in Hitler. But we still had to go 
on with the struggle against Bormann, he decided. 

On March 17, Goebbels, Funk, Ley, and I met with Goering in the 
latter's Berlin palace on Leipziger Platz. At first Goering received us in 
his office, adopting his most official manner— planted behind his enormous 
desk on his Renaissance throne. We sat facing him on uncomfortable 
chairs. Initially, there was no sign of the cordiality he had shown at 
Obersalzberg. It rather seemed as if Goering had repented of his candor. 

But while the rest of us sat silent for the most part, Goering and 
Goebbels aroused each other by outlining the perils presented by that 
triumvirate around Hitler and by devising schemes for recapturing Hitler 
for ourselves. Goebbels seemed to have forgotten completely how Hitler 
had lashed into Goering only a few days earlier. Soon both of them saw 
their goal within reach. Goering, alternating as always between torpor 
and euphoria, was already beginning to discount the influence of the 
headquarters clique. "We mustn't overestimate it either, Herr Goebbels! 
Bormann and Keitel are nothing but the Fuehrer's secretaries, after all. 
Who do they think they are! As far as their own powers are concerned, 
they're nobodies." 

What seemed to disturb Goebbels most was the possibility that 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 264 

Bormann might utilize his direct contacts with the Gauleiters to build 
up bases against our efforts on the home front also. I recall the way 
Goebbels tried to enlist Ley against Bormann in his capacity of Organiza- 
tion Chief of the Party. Finally, Goebbels proposed that the Council of 
Ministers for the Defense of the Reich must be given the right to summon 
Gauleiters and call them to account. Fully aware that Goering would 
scarcely attend the sessions so often, he proposed weekly meetings. 
Casually, he added that probably it would be all right, wouldn't it, if 
he acted as deputy chairman if Goering were sometimes unable to attend. 5 
Goering did not see through Goebbels's machinations and consented. 
Behind the fronts of the great struggle for power the old rivalries 
continued to smolder. 

For a considerable time the numbers of workers whom Sauckel 
claimed to have sent into industry, statistics which he reported to Hitler, 
had ceased to correspond with the actual figures. The difference amounted 
to several hundred thousand. I proposed to our coalition that we join 
forces in compelling Sauckel, Bormann's outpost in our territory, as it 
were, to report truthful data. 

At Hitler s request a large building in the rustic Bavarian style had 
been erected near Berchtesgaden to house the Berlin Chancellery secre- 
tariat. Whenever Hitler stayed at Obersalzberg for months at a time, 
Lammers and his immediate staff conducted the business of the Chancel- 
lery there. Goering arranged for Lammers as the host to invite our group, 
as well as Sauckel and Milch, to meet in the conference room of this 
building on April 12, 1943. Before the meeting Milch and I once more 
reminded Goering of what we wanted. He rubbed his hands: "That will 
soon be taken care of !" 

We were surprised to find that Himmler, Bormann, and Keitel were 
also in the conference room. And to make matters worse, our ally 
Goebbels sent his apologies: On the way to Berchtesgaden he had suffered 
an attack of kidney colic and was lying ill in his special car. To this day 
I don't know whether this was true or whether he merely had an instinct 
for what was going to happen. 

That session marked the end of our alliance. Sauckel simply chal- 
lenged our demand for an additional two million, one hundred thousand 
workers for the entire economy, insisted that he had delivered the needed 
forces, and became furious when I charged that his figures could not be 
accurate.* 

* Later we learned from General Roesch, our armaments inspector for Upper 
Bavaria, that Sauckel had directed his employment bureaus to list every worker who 
was assigned to a factory as placed, even if the worker turned out to be unqualified 
for the particular job and was sent back to the bureau. The factories, on the other 
hand, listed only those workers who were actually hired. ' 



265 ) Intrigues 

Milch and I expected that Goering would ask Sauckel for explanations 
and make him change his labor-assignment policy. Instead, to our horror 
Goering began with a violent attack upon Milch, and thus indirectly upon 
me. It was outrageous that Milch was making so many difficulties, he said. 
Our good party comrade Sauckel who was exerting himself to the utmost 
and had achieved such successes. ... He at any rate felt a great debt of 
gratitude toward him. Milch was simply blind to Sauckel's achievements. 

It was as though Goering had picked out the wrong phonograph 
record. In the ensuing prolonged discussion on the missing workers, each 
of the ministers present offered explanations, on entirely theoretical 
grounds, of the difference between the real and the official figures. 
Himmler commented with the greatest calm that perhaps the missing 
hundreds of thousands had died. 

The conference proved a total failure. No light was thrown on the 
question of the missing labor force, and in addition our grand assault 
on Bormann had come to grief. 

After this meeting Goering took me aside. "I know you like to work 
closely with my state secretary, Milch," he said. "In all friendship I'd like 
to warn you against him. He's unreliable; as soon as his own interests 
are in question, he'll trample over even his best friends." 

I immediately passed this remark on to Milch. He laughed. "A few 
days ago Goering told me exactly the same thing about you/' 

This attempt on Goering's part to sow distrust was the very opposite 
of what we had agreed on: that we would form a bloc. The sad fact was 
that our circles were so infected by suspicion that friendship was felt to 
be a threat. 

A few days after this affair Milch commented that Goering had 
switched sides because the Gestapo had proof of his drug addiction. 
Quite some time before Milch had suggested to me that I look closely 
at Goering's pupils. At the Nuremberg Trial my attorney, Dr. Flachsner, 
told me that Goering had been an addict long before 1933. Flachsner had 
acted as his lawyer once when he was sued for improperly administering 
a morphine injection.* 

Our attempt to mobilize Goering against Bormann was probably 
doomed to failure from the start for financial reasons as well. For as was 
later revealed by a Nuremberg document, Bormann had made Goering 
a gift of six million marks from the industrialists' Adolf Hitler Fund. 

After the collapse of our alliance, Goering actually bestirred him- 
self for a while, but, surprisingly, his activity was directed against me. 
Contrary to his habit, a few weeks later he asked me to invite the leading 

* A lady's dress caught fire in a night club. Goering gave her an injection of 
morphine to relieve the pain. But the injection left a scar and the woman sued Goering. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 266 

men in the steel industry to a conference at Obersalzberg. The meeting 
took place at the drafting tables in my studio and was memorable only 
because of Goering's behavior. He appeared in an euphoric mood, his 
pupils visibly narrowed, and delivered to the astonished specialists from 
the steel industry a long lecture on the manufacture of steel, parading all 
his knowledge of blast furnaces and metallurgy. There followed a succes- 
sion of commonplaces: We had to produce more, must not shim innova- 
tions; industry was frozen in tradition, must learn to jump over its own 
shadow; and more of the like. At the end of his two-hour torrent of 
bombast, Goering's speech slowed and his expression grew more and 
more absent. Finally, he abruptly put his head on the table and fell 
peacefully asleep. We thought it politic to pretend to ignore the splendidly 
uniformed Reich Marshal and proceeded to discuss our problems until 
he awoke again and curtly declared the meeting over. 

For next day Goering had announced a conference on radar problems 
which likewise ended with nothing accomplished. Once again, in the best 
of humor, he gave endless explanations in his Imperial Majesty style, 
telling the specialists what they already knew and he knew nothing about. 
Finally, there came a spate of directives and injunctions. After he had 
left the meeting, highly pleased with himself, I had my hands full undoing 
the damage he had done, while somehow avoiding an outright disavowal 
of Goering. Nevertheless, the incident was so serious that I was com- 
pelled to inform Hitler about it. He seized the next opportunity to sum- 
mon the industrialists to headquarters on May 13, 1943, in order to restore 
the government's prestige.* 

A few months after this setback to our plans I ran into Himmler at 
headquarters. Bluntly, in a threatening voice, he said to me: "I think it 
would be very unwise of you to try to activate the Reich Marshal again!" 

But that was no longer possible in any case. Goering had relapsed 
into his lethargy, and for good. He did not wake up again until he was 
on trial in Nuremberg. 



* In an unpublished diary passage, May 15, 1943, Goebbels wrote: "He [Hitler] 
spent the whole day conferring with the captains of the armaments industry on the 
measures that must be taken now. This conference with the Fuehrer was intended 
to salve the wounds left by Goering's latest, rather unfortunate conference. Goering's 
tactical blunders offended the armaments manufacturers. The Fuehrer has now 
straightened that out." 



19 

Second Man in the State 



Around the beginning of may 1943, a few weeks after the demise of 
our short-lived association, Goebbels was finding in Bormann the qualities 
he had ascribed to Goering a few weeks before. The two came to an 
arrangement— Goebbels promising to direct reports to Hitler through 
Bormann, in return for Bormanns extracting the right sort of decision 
from Hitler. It was clear that Goebbels had written Goering off; he 
would support him henceforth only as a prestige figurehead. 

Thus actual power had shifted still more in Bormanns favor. Never- 
theless, he had no way of knowing whether he might not need me some 
day. Although he must have heard of my ill-fated attempt to dethrone 
him, he behaved amiably toward me and hinted that I could come over 
to his camp as Goebbels had done. I did not avail myself of this offer, 
however. The price seemed to me too high: I would have become 
dependent upon him. 

Goebbels, too, continued to remain in close contact with me, for 
both of us were still bent on making utmost use of our domestic reserves. 
Undoubtedly, I behaved much too trustfully in my relations with him. I 
was fascinated by his dazzling friendliness and perfect manners, as well 
as by his cool logic. 

Outwardly, then, little had changed. The world in which we lived 
forced upon us dissimulation and hypocrisy. Among rivals an honest word 
was rarely spoken, for fear it would be carried back to Hitler in a dis- 

( 267 ) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 268 

torted version. Everyone conspired, took Hitler s capriciousness into his 
reckonings, and won or lost in the course of this cryptic game. I played 
on this out-of-tune keyboard of mutual relations just as unscrupulously 
as all the others. 

In the second half of May, Goering sent word to me that he wanted to 
make a speech on armaments, together with me, in the Sportpalast. I 
agreed. A few days later, however, Hitler to my surprise appointed 
Goebbels as the speaker. When we were coordinating our texts, the 
Propaganda Minister advised me to shorten my speech, since his would 
take an hour. If you don t stay considerably under half an hour, the 
audience will lose interest." As usual, we sent both speeches to Hitler 
in manuscript, with a note to the effect that mine was going to be con- 
densed by a third. Hitler ordered me to come to Obersalzberg. While I 
was sitting by, he read the drafts Bormann handed to him. With what 
seemed to me eagerness, he ruthlessly cut Goebbels's speech by half 
within a few minutes. "Here, Bormann, inform the Doctor and tell him 
that I think Speers speech excellent." In the presence of the arch-intriguer 
Bormann, Hitler had thus helped me to increase my prestige vis-^-vis 
Goebbels. It was a way of letting both men know that I still stood high. I 
could count on Hitler s supporting me, if need be, against his closest 
associates. 

My speech on June 5, 1943, in which I could for the first time an- 
nounce a sizable increase in armaments production, was a failure on two 
scores. From the party hierarchy I heard such comments as: "So it can be 
done without big sacrifices! Then why should we upset the populace by 
drastic measures?" The General Staff and the frontline commanders, on 
the other hand, doubted the truth of my statistics whenever they had 
supply difficulties with ammunition or ordnance. 

The Soviet winter offensive had ground to a halt. Our increased 
production enabled us to close the gap on the eastern front. What is more, 
the delivery of new weapons encouraged Hitler to make preparations for 
an offensive in spite of the winter s losses of materiel. The objective was 
to cut off a bend in the line near Kursk. The beginning of this offensive 
was prepared under the code name "Operation Citadel." It kept being 
postponed because Hitler counted heavily on the effectiveness of the new 
tanks. Above all he was expecting wonders from a new type of tank with 
electric drive constructed by Professor Porsche. 

At a simple supper in a small back room of the Chancellery furnished 
in peasant style, I by chance heard from Sepp Dietrich, the commander of 
Hitler s bodyguard, that Hitler intended to issue an order that this time 
no prisoners were to be taken. In the course of advances by SS units it 
had been established, Dietrich said, that the Soviet troops had killed 
their German prisoners. Hitler had then and there announced that a 
thousandfold retaliation in blood must be taken. 



269 ) Second Man in the State 

I was thunderstruck. But I was also selfishly alarmed at the sheer 
wastefulness of such a step. Hitler was counting on hundreds of thousands 
of prisoners. For months we had been trying in vain to close a gap of 
hundreds of thousands in the supply of labor. I therefore took the first 
opportunity to reason with Hitler on this score. It was not difficult to per- 
suade him to reconsider; he seemed rather relieved to be able to withdraw 
his pledge to the SS. That same day, July 8, 1943, he had Keitel prepare 
instructions to the effect that all prisoners must be sent into armaments 
production. 1 

The disagreement over the fate of prisoners proved to be unnecessary. 
The offensive began on July 5, but in spite of the formidable array of our 
most advanced weapons we were not able to encircle the Soviet forces. 
Hitler s confidence had been mistaken. After two weeks of battle he gave 
up. This failure was a sign that even in the summer the initiative had 
passed to the enemy. 

After the second winter disaster at Stalingrad, the Army High Com- 
mand had urged the establishing of a defensive position far to the rear, 
but Hitler would not hear of it. Now, after the thwarted offensive, even 
Hitler was ready to prepare defensive positions from twelve to fifteen 
miles behind the main line of battle. 2 The General Staff made a counter- 
proposal: establishing the defensive line on the west bank of the Dnieper 
where the steep slope, over a hundred and fifty feet high, dominated the 
plain across the river. There would presumably have been sufficient time 
for building an extensive defensive line there, for the Dnieper was still 
some one hundred twenty-five miles behind the front. But Hitler flatly 
rejected this plan. Whereas during his successful campaigns he had always 
hailed the German soldiers as the best in the world, he now declared: 
"Building a position so far to the rear is not possible for psychological 
reasons. If the troops learn that there are fortified positions perhaps 
sixty miles behind the front line, no one will be able to persuade them to 
fight. At the first opportunity they'll fall back without resistance." 3 

In spite of this ban, on Manstein's orders and with the tacit consent 
of Zeitzler, the Todt Organization began building fortified positions on the 
Bug in December 1943. Hitler found out about this from my deputy, 
Dorsch. At this time die Soviet armies were still some one hundred to one 
hundred and twenty-five miles east of the Bug River. And once again 
Hitler commanded, in unusually strong language and on the same grounds 
as before, that the work be stopped at once.* This building of rear posi- 
tions, he stormed, was proof again of the defeatist attitude of Manstein 
and his army group. 

* JodTs unpublished diary (entry for December 16, 1943) describes the outcome 
of this unauthorized action: "Dorsch reported the deployment of the Todt Organiza- 
tion along the Bug, something of which the Fuehrer had known nothing. . . . The 
Fuehrer spoke agitatedly to Minister Speer and me about the defeatist mood of 
Manstein's staff, which Gauleiter Koch had described to him." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 2J0 

Hitler's obstinacy made it easier for the Soviet troops to harass our 
armies. For in Russia digging became impossible once the ground froze 
in November. What time we had was squandered. The soldiers were ex- 
posed with no defenses to the weather; moreover our winter equipment 
was of poor quality compared to that of the enemy. 

Such behavior was not the only indication that Hitler had refused 
to acknowledge the turn of affairs. In the spring of 1943 he had demanded 
that a three-mile-long road and railroad bridge be built across the Strait 
of Kerch, although we had long been building a cable railway there; it 
went into operation on June 14 with a daily capacity of one thousand tons. 
This amount of supplies just sufficed for the defensive needs of the Seven- 
teenth Army. But Hitler had not forsaken his plan to push through the 
Caucasus to Persia. He justified his order for the bridge explicitly on the 
necessity to transport materiel and troops to the Kuban bridgehead for an 
offensive.* His generals, however, had long put any such ideas out of their 
heads. On a visit to the Kuban bridgehead the frontline generals expressed 
anxiety over whether the positions could be held at all in the face of the 
enemy's obvious strength. When I reported these fears to Hitler he said 
contemptuously: "Nothing but empty evasions! Janicke is just like the 
General Staff; he hasn't faith in a new offensive." 

Shortly afterward, in the summer of 1943, General Janicke, com- 
mander of the Seventeenth Army, was forced to ask Zeitzler to recommend 
retreat from the exposed Kuban bridgehead. He wanted to take up a 
more favorable position in the Crimea to be ready for the expected Soviet 
winter offensive. Hitler, on the other hand, insisted even more obstinately 
than before that the building of the bridge for his offensive plans must be 
speeded. Even at that time it was clear that the bridge would never be 
completed. On September 4, the last German units began evacuating 
Hitler's bridgehead on the continent of Asia. 

Just as we had met at Goering's house to discuss overcoming the crisis 
in political leadership, Guderian, Zeitzler, Fromm, and I were now talking 
about the military leadership crisis. In the summer of 1943, General Gu- 
derian, Inspector General of the Tank Forces, asked me to set up a meet- 
ing with army Chief of Staff Zeitzler. There had been some disputes be- 
tween the two men, springing from unresolved jurisdictional questions. 
Since I had something approaching a friendly relationship with both gen- 
erals, it was natural to ask me to play the part of go-between. But it turned 
out that Guderian had more in mind than the settlement of minor disputes. 

* Because of the frequency of earth tremors, provision had to be made for extra- 
strength girders which would have required vast quantities of precious steel. In addi- 
tion, as Zeitzler pointed out during the situation conference, if we transported building 
materials for the bridge over the inadequate railroad facilities of the Crimea, we 
would be forced to curtail the shipments needed to maintain our defensive positions. 



271 ) Second Man in the State 

He wanted to discuss common tactics in regard to the matter of a new 
Commander in Chief of the army. We met in my home at Obersalzberg. 

The differences between Zeitzler and Guderian quickly dwindled 
to nothing. The conversation centered on the situation that had arisen 
from Hitler's assuming command of the army but not exercising it. The 
interests of the army as against the two other branches of the service 
and the SS must be represented more vigorously, Zeitzler thought. 
Hitler, as Commander in Chief of the armed forces, ought to remain non- 
partisan. A Commander in Chief of the army, Guderian added, had to 
maintain close personal contact with the army commanders. He should 
be looking out for the needs of his troops and deciding fundamental ques- 
tions of supply. But Hitler, both men agreed, had neither the time nor the 
inclination to act on this practical level, nor to uphold the special interests 
of one branch of the service. He appointed and deposed generals whom 
he hardly knew. Only a Commander in Chief who associated with his 
higher-ranking officers on a personal basis could decide such questions of 
personnel. The army knew, Guderian said, that Hitler scarcely interfered 
in the personnel policies of his Commanders in Chief of the air force and 
the navy. Only the army was exposed to this sort of treatment. 

We came to the conclusion that each of us would try to appeal to 
Hitler to appoint a new Commander in Chief of the army. But the very 
first hints that Guderian and I separately made to Hitler came to grief; he 
was obviously offended and rejected the idea in unusually sharp terms. I 
did not know that shortly before we spoke Field Marshals von Kluge and 
von Manstein had undertaken a similar probe on the same subject. Hitler 
must have assumed that we were all in collusion. 

The time when Hitler readily granted all my personal and organiza- 
tional requests was long since past. The triumvirate of Bormann, Lam- 
mers, and Keitel was doing its best to block any further extension of my 
power, even though concern for the armaments program might have dic- 
tated the opposite. However, there was little these three could do against 
the joint proposal by Admiral Doenitz and myself that we also assume con- 
trol of naval armaments. 

I had met Doenitz immediately after my appointment in June 1942. 
The then commander of the U-boat fleet received me in Paris in an apart- 
ment which struck me at once by its avant-garde severity. I was all the 
more taken with the plain surroundings since I had just come from an 
opulent lunch with many courses and expensive wines given by Field 
Marshal Sperrle, commander of the air forces stationed in France. He had 
set up headquarters in the Palais du Luxembourg, the former palace of 
Marie de Medicis. The Field Marshal's craving for luxury and public dis- 
play ran a close second to that of his superior Goering; he was also his 
match in corpulence. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 272 

During the next several months problems connected with the build- 
ing of the large U-boat pens along the Atlantic brought Doenitz and me 
together several times. Admiral Raeder, Commander in Chief of the navy, 
seemed to be annoyed. He tartly forbade Doenitz to discuss technical 
questions directly with me. 

At the end of December 1942, Captain Schutze, the successful U-boat 
commander, informed me of serious dissension between the Berlin navy 
command and Doenitz. From various signs and portents, Schutze said, the 
submarine fleet knew that their commander was going to be relieved in 
the near future. A few days later I heard from State Secretary Naumann 
that the navy censor in the Propaganda Ministry had stricken the name of 
Doenitz from the captions of all press photos showing an inspection tour 
undertaken jointly by Raeder and Doenitz. 

When I was in headquarters at the beginning of January, Hitler was 
worked up over foreign press reports of a naval battle which the navy 
command had not informed him about in detail.* As if by chance, in our 
subsequent conference he raised the question of the feasibility of assem- 
bly-line building of U-boats, but soon he became more interested in the 
troubles I was having in my collaboration with Raeder. I told him of the 
stricture against my discussing technical questions with Doenitz, of the 
U-boat officers' fears that their commander was going to be replaced, and 
of the censorship of the photo captions. By now I had learned, from watch- 
ing Bormann s tactics, that one had to plant suspicions very carefully and 
gradually for them to be effective with Hitler. Any direct attempt to influ- 
ence him was hopeless, since he never accepted a decision which he 
thought had been imposed on him. Therefore I merely hinted that all ob- 
stacles standing in the way of our U-boat plans could be eliminated if 
Doenitz were given his head. Actually, what I wanted to achieve was the 
replacement of Raeder. But knowing the tenacity with which Hitler clung 
to his old associates I hardly hoped that I would succeed. 

On January 30, Doenitz was named Grand Admiral and simultane- 
ously appointed Commander in Chief of the navy, while Raeder was 
kicked upstairs: He became Admiral Inspector of the navy, which entitled 
him solely to the privilege of a state funeral. 

By resolute expertise and technical arguments, Doenitz was able to 
protect the navy from Hitler s whims until the end of the war. I met with 
him frequently to discuss the problems of building submarines— despite 
the fact that this close cooperation began with a foul-up. Without con- 
sulting me, after hearing a report from Doenitz, Hitler raised all naval 
armament to the highest priority. This happened in the middle of April, 
but only three months before, on January 22, 1943, he had already classi- 

* This was the naval battle that took place December 31, 1942. Hitler held that 
the Liitzow and the Hipper had retreated in the face of weaker English forces. He 
accused the navy of lacking fighting spirit. 



273 ) Second Man in the State 

fied the expanded tank program as the task of highest priority. The up- 
shot was that two programs would be competing. It was unnecessary for 
me to appeal to Hitler again. Before any controversy developed, Doenitz 
had already realized that cooperation with the massive apparatus of army 
procurement would be more useful than Hitlers favoritism. We soon 
agreed to transfer naval armaments production to my organization. In 
taking this on, I pledged myself to carry out the naval program Doenitz 
had envisaged. This meant, instead of the previous monthly production of 
twenty submarines of the smaller type totaling sixteen thousand tons dis- 
placement, producing forty U-boats per month with a displacement total- 
ing more than fifty thousand tons. In addition I was to double the number 
of minesweepers and PT boats. 

Doenitz had made it clear that only the production of a new type of 
U-boat could save our submarine warfare. The navy wanted to abandon 
the previous type of "surface ship" which occasionally moved under water. 
It wanted to give its U-boats the best possible streamlining and attain a 
higher underwater speed and a greater underwater range by doubling the 
power of the electric motors and simplifying the system of storage bat- 
teries. 

As always in such cases, the chief problem was to find the right di- 
rector for this assignment. I chose a fellow Swabian, Otto Merker, who 
had hitherto proved his talents in the building of fire engines. Here was 
a challenge to all marine engineers. On July 5, 1943, Merker presented 
his new construction system to the heads of the navy. As was being done 
in the production of Liberty ships in the United States, the submarines 
were to be built in inland factories, where the machinery and electrical 
equipment would also be installed. They were then to be transported in 
sections to the coast and quickly assembled there. We would thus avoid 
the problem of the shipyards, whose limited facilities had so far stood in 
the way of any expansion of our shipbuilding programs. 4 Doenitz sounded 
almost emotional when he declared, at the end of our conference: "This 
means we are beginning a new life." 

For the time being, however, we had nothing but a vision of what 
the new U-boats would look like. In order to design them and to settle on 
the details, a development commission was established. Its chairman was 
not a leading engineer, as was customary, but Admiral Topp, whom Doe- 
nitz assigned to this task without our even attempting to clarify the com- 
plicated questions that arose as a result. The cooperation between Topp 
and Merker worked out as easily as that between Doenitz and myself. 

Barely four months after the first session of the development com- 
mission—on November n, 1943— all the drawings were finished. A month 
later Doenitz and I were able to inspect and even walk inside a wooden 
model of the large new sixteen hundred ton submarine. Even while the 
blueprints were being prepared, our Directive Committee for Shipbuild- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 274 

ing was assigning contracts to industry— a procedure we had already used 
in speeding up the production of the new Panther tank. Thanks to all this, 
the first seaworthy U-boats of the new type were delivered to the navy for 
testing in 1944. We would have been able to keep our promise of deliver- 
ing forty boats a month by early in 1945, however badly the war was 
going otherwise, if air raids had not destroyed a third of the submarines 
at the dockyards. 5 

At the time, Doenitz and I often asked ourselves why we had not 
begun building the new type of U-boat earlier. For no technical innova- 
tions were employed; the engineering principles had been known for 
years. The new boats, so the experts assured us, would have revolutionized 
submarine warfare. This fact seemed to be appreciated by the American 
navy, which after the war began building the new type for itself. 

On July 26, 1943, three days after Doenitz and I signed our joint 
decree on the new naval program, I obtained Hitlers consent to placing 
all production under my Ministry. For tactical reasons I had asked for this 
on the grounds of the additional burdens which the naval program and 
other tasks required by Hitler were imposing upon industry. By transform- 
ing large consumer goods plants into armaments plants, I explained to 
Hitler, we would not only free half a million German workers but also 
enlist the industrial managers and the factory machinery in our urgent 
programs. Most of the Gauleiters, however, objected to such measures. 
The Ministry of Economics had proved too weak to enforce such shifts 
against the opposition of the Gauleiters. And, to jump a bit ahead in the 
story, I also was too weak, as I was soon forced to realize. 

After an unusually protracted procedure, in which all the ministers 
involved and all the various boards of the Four- Year Plan were requested 
to hand in their objections, Lammers convoked the ministers for a meeting 
in the Cabinet Room on August 26. Thanks to the generosity of Funk, 
who at this meeting "delivered his own funeral oration with wit and 
humor," it was unanimously agreed that from now on all war production 
would be placed under the control of my Ministry. Willy-nilly, Lammers 
had to promise to communicate this result to Hitler via Bormann. A few 
days later Funk and I went to the Fuehrer's headquarters together to re- 
ceive Hitlers final authorization. 

Greatly to my surprise, however, Hitler, in Funk's presence, cut short 
my remarks, saying irritably that he would not listen to any further ex- 
planations. Only a few hours ago Bormann had warned him, he said, that 
I was going to lure him into signing something that had been discussed 
neither with Reich Minister Lammers nor with the Reich Marshal. He 
was not going to be drawn into our little rivalries. When I tried to explain 
that Reich Minister Lammers had properly obtained the consent of Goe- 
rings state secretary for the Four-Year Plan, Hitler again cut me off with 



275 ) Second Man in the State 

unaccustomed curtness: "I am glad that in Bormann at least I have a faith- 
ful soul around me." The implication was clear: He was accusing me of 
trickery. 

Funk informed Lammers of the incident. Then we went to meet Goe- 
ring, who was on the way to Hitler's headquarters in his private car; he had 
just come from his personal hunting preserve, the Rominten Heath. Goe- 
ring, too, was very huffy; undoubtedly he had been told only one side of 
the story and had been warned against us. Funk, amiable and persuasive, 
finally succeeded in breaking the ice and going over our decree point by 
point. And now Goering indicated full agreement, though not before we 
had inserted a sentence: "The powers of the Reich Marshal of the Greater 
German Reich as Commissioner General for the Four- Year Plan remain 
unaffected." In practice that was a very minor reservation— all the more 
so since most of the important functions of the Four- Year Plan were di- 
rected by me anyhow through the Central Planning Board. 

As a sign of his approval, Goering signed our draft, and Lammers 
could report by teletype that there were no longer any objections. There- 
upon Hitler, too, was ready to sign the draft when it was presented to him 
for signature a few days later, on September 2. From a Reich Minister of 
Armaments and Munitions I had now become Reich Minister of Arma- 
ments and War Production. 

Bormann's intrigue had fallen through this time. I did not make 
remonstrances to Hitler; instead, I left it to him to consider whether 
Bormann had actually served him loyally in this case. After my recent 
experiences I knew it was wiser not to expose Bormann's machinations and 
to spare Hitler embarrassment. 

But Bormann was surely the source of all the overt or covert opposi- 
tion to an expansion of my Ministry. To Bormann it was all too clear that 
I was moving outside the reach of his power and accumulating more and 
more power myself. Moreover, my work had brought me into comradely 
contacts with the leadership of the army and navy: with Guderian, Zeitz- 
ler, Fromm, and Milch, and now lately with Doenitz. Even in Hitler s 
immediate entourage I was particularly close to the anti-Bormann forces: 
Hitler's army adjutant, General Engel; his air force adjutant, General von 
Below, and Hitler's armed forces adjutant, General Schmundt. In addi- 
tion Hitler's physician, Dr. Karl Brandt, whom Bormann likewise consid- 
ered a personal opponent of his, was quite close to me. 

One evening when I had had a few glasses of Steinhager with 
Schmundt, he came out with the declaration that I was the army's great 
hope. Wherever he went, he said, the generals had the greatest confidence 
in me, whereas they had nothing but derogatory opinions of Goering. With 
rather high-flown emotion he concluded: "You can always rely on the 
army, Herr Speer. It is behind you." 

I have never quite fathomed what Schmundt had in mind, though I 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 276 

suspect that he was confusing the army with the generals. But it seems 
probable that Schmundt must have said something of the sort to others. 
Given the narrow confines of the headquarters, such remarks must surely 
have reached Bormann s ears. 

Around this time, perhaps in the autumn of 1943, Hitler put me in 
some embarrassment when, just before the beginning of a situation con- 
ference, he greeted Himmler and me in the presence of several associates 
with the phrase: "You two peers." Whatever Hitler meant by it, the chief 
of the SS could scarcely have been pleased by this remark, given his 
special niche in the power structure. In those same weeks Zeitzler, too, 
told me with pleasure: "The Fuehrer is so pleased with you. He recently 
said that he placed the greatest hopes in you, that now a new sun has 
arisen after Goering."* 

I asked Zeitzler not to quote this. But since the same words were re- 
ported to me by other persons within the headquarters area, there could 
be no doubt that Bormann also heard the tribute. Hitler s powerful sec- 
retary was forced to realize that he had not been able to turn Hitler 
against me that summer. Rather, the opposite had happened. 

Since Hitler did not say such things often, Bormann must have taken 
the threat to heart. To him, it spelled danger. From now on he kept telling 
his closest associates that I was not only an enemy of the party but was 
actually bent on succeeding Hitler.** He was not entirely wrong in this 
assumption. I recall having had several conversations with Milch about 
the matter. 

At the time Hitler must have been wondering whom he should se- 
lect for his successor. Goering's reputation was undermined, Hess had 
ruled himself out, Schirach had been ruined by Bormann's intrigues, and 
Bormann, Himmler, and Goebbels did not correspond to the "artistic type" 
Hitler envisaged. Hitler probably thought he recognized kindred features 
in me. He considered me a gifted artist who within a short time had won 
an impressive position within the political hierarchy and finally, by 
achievements in the field of armaments, had also demonstrated special 
abilities in the military field. Only in foreign policy, Hitler s fourth do- 
main, I had not come to the fore. Possibly he regarded me as an artistic 
genius who had successfully switched to politics, so that I thus indirectly 
served as a confirmation of his own career. 

* It might be thought that after years of experience Hitler would know how 
such remarks were received and what reactions they inevitably evoked. I could not 
decide whether Hitler did think this far ahead or was even capable of doing so. 
Sometimes he struck me as a total innocent— or as a misanthrope who did not care 
what the effects were. Perhaps, too, he believed that he could set things right himself 
whenever he chose. 

** Dr. G. Klopfer, Bormann's state secretary, testified in an affidavit dated July 
7, 1947: "Bormann repeatedly stated that Speer was a confirmed opponent of the party 
and was in fact ambitious to become Hitler's successor." 



277 ) Second Man in the State 

Among friends I always called Bormann "the man with the hedge 
clippers." For he was forever using all his energy, cunning, and brutality 
to prevent anyone from rising above a certain level. From then on, Bor- 
mann devoted his full capacities to reducing my power. After October 
1943 the Gauleiters formed a front against me. Before another year had 
passed, things became so difficult that I often wanted to give up and re- 
sign my post. Until the end of the war this struggle between Bormann and 
me remained undecided. Hitler did not want to lose me, even occasionally 
singled me out for a display of favor, but then again would turn on me 
rudely. Bormann could not wrest from me my successful industrial ap- 
paratus. This was so much my own creation that my fall would have 
meant the end of it and thus have endangered the war effort. 



2o 
Bombs 



The exuberance i had felt during the building of the new organization 
and the success and recognition of the early months soon gave way to 
more somber feelings. The labor problem, unsolved raw materials ques- 
tions, and court intrigues created constant worries. The British air raids 
began to have their first serious effects on production and for a while 
made me forget about Bormann, Sauckel, and the Central Planning Board. 
However they also served to raise my prestige. For in spite of the losses 
of factories we were producing more, not less. 

These air raids carried the war into our midst. In the burning and 
devastated cities we daily experienced the direct impact of the war. And 
it spurred us to do our utmost. 

Neither did the bombings and the hardships that resulted from them 
weaken the morale of the populace. On the contrary, from my visits to 
armaments plants and my contacts with the man in the street I carried 
away the impression of growing toughness. It may well be that the esti- 
mated loss of 9 percent of our production capacity 1 was amply balanced 
out by increased effort. 

Our heaviest expense was in fact the elaborate defensive measures. In 
the Reich and in the western theaters of war the barrels of ten thousand 
antiaircraft guns were pointed toward the sky. 2 The same guns could have 
well been employed in Russia against tanks and other ground targets. Had 
it not been for this new front, the air front over Germany, our defensive 

( *78 ) 



279 ) Bombs 

strength against tanks would have been about doubled, as far as equip- 
ment was concerned. Moreover, the antiaircraft force tied down hundreds 
of thousands of young soldiers. A third of the optical industry was busy 
producing gunsights for the flak batteries. About half of the electronics 
industry was engaged in producing radar and communications networks 
for defense against bombing. Simply because of this, in spite of the high 
level of the German electronics and optical industries, the supply of our 
frontline troops with modern equipment remained far behind that of the 
Western armies.* 

We were given a foretaste of our coming woes as early as the night of 
May 30, 1942, when the British gathered all their forces for an attack on 
Cologne with ten hundred and forty-six bombers. 

By chance Milch and I were summoned to see Goering on the morn- 
ing after the raid. This time he was not residing in Karinhall, but at 
Veldenstein castle in Franconia. We found him in a bad humor, still not 
believing the reports of the Cologne bombing. "Impossible, that many 
bombs cannot be dropped in a single night," he snarled at his adjutant. 
"Connect me with the Gauleiter of Cologne." 

There followed, in our presence, a preposterous telephone conversa- 
tion. "The report from your police commissioner is a stinking lie!" Ap- 
parently the Gauleiter begged to differ. "I tell you as the Reich Marshal 
that the figures cited are simply too high. How can you dare report such 
fantasies to the Fuehrer!" The Gauleiter at the other end of the line was 
evidently insisting on his figures. "How are you going to count the fire 
bombs? Those are nothing but estimates. I tell you once more they're 
many times too high. All wrong! Send another report to the Fuehrer at 
once revising your figures. Or are you trying to imply that I am lying? I 
have already delivered my report to the Fuehrer with the correct figures. 
That stands!" 

As though nothing had happened, Goering showed us through his 
house, his parents' former home. As if this were most serene peacetime, he 
had blueprints brought in and explained to us what a magnificent citadel 
he would be building to replace the simple Biedermeier house of his 
parents in the courtyard of the old ruin. But first of all he wanted to have 
a reliable air-raid shelter built. The plans for that were already drawn up. 

Three days later I was at headquarters. The excitement over the air 
raid on Cologne had not yet died down. I mentioned to Hitler the curious 
telephone conversation between Goering and Gauleiter Grohe— naturally 
assuming that Goering's information must be more authentic than the 

* Thus a serious shortage of army communications equipment developed— for 
instance, walkie-talkies for the infantry and sound-ranging apparatus for the artillery. 
In addition, further development of such devices had to be neglected in favor of 
antiaircraft weaponry. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 280 

Gauleiter s. But Hitler had already formed his own opinion. He presented 
Goering with the reports in the enemy newspapers on the enormous num- 
ber of planes committed to the raid and the quantity of bombs they had 
dropped. These figures were even higher than those of the Cologne police 
commissioner. 3 Hitler was furious with Goering's attempt to cover up, 
but he also considered the staff of the air force command partly respon- 
sible. Next day Goering was received as usual. The affair was never men- 
tioned again. 

As early as September 20, 1942, I had warned Hitler that the tank 
production of Friedrichshafen and the ball-bearing facilities in Schwein- 
furt were crucial to our whole effort. Hitler thereupon ordered increased 
antiaircraft protection for these two cities. Actually, as I had early rec- 
ognized, the war could largely have been decided in 1943 if instead of 
vast but pointless area bombing the planes had concentrated on the cen- 
ters of armaments production. On April 11, 1943, 1 proposed to Hitler that 
a committee of industrial specialists be set to determining the crucial tar- 
gets in Soviet power production. Four weeks later, however, the first 
attempt was made— not by us but by the British air force— to influence the 
course of the war by destroying a single nerve center of the war econo- 
my. The principle followed was to paralyze a cross section, as it were— 
just as a motor can be made useless by the removal of the ignition. On 
May 17, 1943, a mere nineteen bombers of the RAF tried to strike at our 
whole armaments industry by destroying the hydroelectric plants of the 
Ruhr. 

The report that reached me in the early hours of the morning was 
most alarming. The largest of the dams, the Mohne dam, had been shat- 
tered and the reservoir emptied. As yet there were no reports on the three 
other dams. At dawn we landed at Werl Airfield, having first surveyed 
the scene of devastation from above. The power plant at the foot of the 
shattered dam looked as if it had been erased, along with its heavy 
turbines. 

A torrent of water had flooded the Ruhr Valley. That had the seem- 
ingly insignificant but grave consequence that the electrical installations 
at the pumping stations were soaked and muddied, so that industry was 
brought to a standstill and the water supply of the population imperiled. 
My report on the situation, which I soon afterward delivered at the 
Fuehrer s headquarters, made "a deep impression on the Fuehrer. He kept 
the documents with him."* 

The British had not succeeded, however, in destroying the three 

* Fuhrerprotokolly May 30, 1943, Point 16. We immediately summoned experts 
from all over Germany who had the electrical insulation dried out and also confiscated 
other motors of this type from other factories, regardless of the consequences. Thus 
the Ruhr industries would be supplied with water within a few weeks. 



281 ) Bombs 

other reservoirs. Had they done so, the Ruhr Valley would have been 
almost completely deprived of water in the coming summer months. At 
the largest of the reservoirs, the Sorpe Valley reservoir, they did achieve 
a direct hit on the center of the dam. I inspected it that same day. Fortu- 
nately the bomb hole was slightly higher than the water level. Just a few 
inches lower— and a small brook would have been transformed into a 
raging river which would have swept away the stone and earthen dam. 4 
That night, employing just a few bombers, the British came close to a 
success which would have been greater than anything they had achieved 
hitherto with a commitment of thousands of bombers. But they made a 
single mistake which puzzles me to this day: They divided their forces and 
that same night destroyed the Eder Valley dam, although it had nothing 
whatsoever to do with the supply of water to the Ruhr.* 

A few days after this attack seven thousand men, whom I had ordered 
shifted from the Atlantic Wall to the Mohne and Eder areas, were hard 
at work repairing the dams. On September 23, 1943, in the nick of time 
before the beginning of the rains, the breach in the Mohne dam was 
closed. 5 We were thus able to collect the precipitation of the late autumn 
and winter of 1943 for the needs of the following summer. While we were 
engaged in rebuilding, the British air force missed its second chance. A 
few bombs would have produced cave-ins at the exposed building sites, 
and a few fire bombs could have set the wooden scaffolding blazing. 

After these experiences I wondered once again why our LuftwaflFe > 
with its by now reduced forces, did not launch similar pinpoint attacks 
whose effects could be devastating. At the end of May 1943, two weeks 
after the British raid, I reminded Hitler of my idea of April 11 that a group 
of experts might pinpoint the key industrial targets in the enemy camp. 
But as so often, Hitler proved irresolute. *Tm afraid that the General Staff 
of the air force will not want to take advice from your industrial associates. 
I too have broached such a plan to General Jeschonnek several times. 
"But," he concluded in rather a resigned tone, "you speak to him about it 
sometime." Evidently Hitler was not going to do anything about this; he 
lacked any sense of the decisive importance of such operations. There is 
no question that once before he had thrown away his chance— between 
1939 and 1941 when he directed our air raids against England's cities in- 

* According to Charles Webster and Noble Franldand, The Strategic Air Of- 
fensive against Germany (London, 1961), Vol. II, the fifth plane succeeded in destroy- 
ing the Mohne Valley dam. Subsequent attacks were directed against the Eder Valley 
dam, which served mainly to equalize the water level of the Weser and the Midland 
Canal during the summer months, thus maintaining navigation. Not until this dam had 
been destroyed did two planes attack the Sorpe Valley dam. In the meantime Air 
Marshal Bottomley had suggested on April 5, 1943, that the Mohne and Sorpe dams 
be attacked before the Eder dam. But the bombs that had been developed specifically 
for this purpose were considered unsuitable for the earthen dam of the Sorpe reservoir. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 282 

stead of coordinating them with the U-boat campaigns and, for example, 
attacking the English ports which were in any case sometimes strained 
beyond their capacity by the convoy system. Now he once again failed to 
see his opportunity. And the British, for their part, thoughtlessly copied 
this irrational conduct— aside from their single attack on the dams. 

In spite of Hitler's skepticism and my own lack of influence upon air 
force strategy, I did not feel discouraged. On June 23, I formed a com- 
mittee consisting of several industry experts to analyze prime bombing 
targets. 6 Our first proposal concerned the British coal industry, for British 
technical publications provided a complete picture of its centers, loca- 
tions, capacities, and so on. But this proposal came two years too late; our 
air power no longer sufficed. 

Given our reduced forces, one prime target virtually forced itself on 
our attention: the Russian electric power plants. To judge by our experi- 
ences, no systematically organized air defenses needed to be anticipated 
in Russia. Moreover, the electric power system in the Soviet Union differed 
structurally from that of the Western countries in one crucial point. 
Whereas the gradual industrial growth of the West had resulted in many 
middle-sized power plants connected in a grid, in the Soviet Union large 
power plants of gigantic dimensions had been built, usually in the heart 
of extensive industrial areas. 7 For example, a single huge power plant on 
the upper Volga supplied most of the energy consumption of Moscow. We 
had information, in fact, that 60 percent of the manufacturing of essen- 
tial optical parts and electrical equipment was concentrated in the Soviet 
capital. Moreover, the destruction of a few gigantic power plants in the 
Urals would have put a halt to much of Soviet steel production as well as 
to tank and munitions manufacture. A direct hit on the turbines or their 
conduits would have released masses of water of a destructiveness greater 
than that of many bombs. Since many of the major Soviet power plants 
had been built with the assistance of German companies, we were able to 
obtain very good data on them. 

On November 26, Goering gave the order to strengthen the Sixth Air 
Corps under Major General Rudolf Meister with long-range bombers. In 
December the units were assembled near Bialystok. 8 We had wooden 
models of the power plants made for use in training the pilots. Early in 
December I had informed Hitler. 9 Milch had relayed our plans to Giinter 
Korten, the new Chief of Staff of the air force. On February 4, I wrote 
Korten that "even today the prospects are good ... for an operative air 
campaign against the Soviet Union. ... I definitely hope that significant 
effects on the fighting power of the Soviet Union will result from it." I was 
referring specifically to the attacks upon the power plants in the vicinity 
of Moscow and the upper Volga. 

Success depended— as always in such operations— upon chance factors. 
I did not think that our action would decisively affect the war. But I 



283 ) Bombs 

hoped, as I wrote to Korten, that we would wreak enough damage on 
Soviet production so that it would take several months for American sup- 
plies to balance out their losses. 

Once again we were two years too late. The Russian winter offensive 
forced our troops to retreat. The situation had grown critical. In emer- 
gencies Hitler was, as so often, amazingly short-sighted. At the end of 
February he told me that the "Meister Corps" had been ordered to destroy 
railroad lines in order to slow down Russian supplies. I objected that the 
soil in Russia was frozen hard and our bombs would have only a super- 
ficial effect. Moreover, according to our own experience and despite the 
fact that the German railroads were much more complex and hence more 
sensitive to destruction, damage to railroad sections could often be re- 
paired in a matter of hours. But these objections were in vain. The "Meis- 
ter Corps" came to grief in a senseless operation, and the Russians were 
in no way impeded. 

Whatever interest Hitler might still have had in the idea of pinpoint 
bombing strategy was forgotten in his stubborn determination to retaliate 
against England. Even after the annihilation of the "Meister Corps," we 
would still have had enough bombers for limited targets. But Hitler suc- 
cumbed to the unrealistic hope that a few massive air strikes on London 
might persuade the British to give up their pounding of Germany. That 
was the only reason he continued to demand, as late as 1943, the develop- 
ment and production of new heavy bombers. It made no impression upon 
him that such bombers could have been used with far greater effect in the 
east, although occasionally, even as late as the summer of 1944, he would 
seem to be swayed by my arguments. 10 He as well as our air force staff 
could not grasp the principle of aerial warfare in technological terms. 
Instead they proceeded along outmoded military lines. So did the other 
side at first. 

While I was trying to convert Hitler and the General Staff of the air 
force to this policy, our Western enemies launched five major attacks on 
a single big city— Hamburg— within a week, from July 25 to August 2. 11 
Rash as this operation was, it had catastrophic consequences for us. The 
first attacks put the water supply pipes out of action, so that in the sub- 
sequent bombings the fire department had no way of fighting the fires. 
Huge conflagrations created cyclone-like firestorms; the asphalt of the 
streets began to blaze; people were suffocated in their cellars or burned 
to death in the streets. The devastation of this series of air raids could be 
compared only with the effects of a major earthquake. Gauleiter Kauf- 
mann teletyped Hitler repeatedly, begging him to visit the stricken city. 
When these pleas proved fruitless, he asked Hitler at least to receive a 
delegation of some of the more heroic rescue crews. But Hitler refused 
even that. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 284 

Hamburg had suffered the fate Goering and Hitler had conceived for 
London in 1940. At a supper in the Chancellery in that year Hitler had, 
in the course of a monologue, worked himself up to a frenzy of destruc- 
tiveness: 

Have you ever looked at a map of London? It is so closely built up that 
one source of fire alone would suffice to destroy the whole city, as happened 
once before, two hundred years ago. Goering wants to use innumerable in- 
cendiary bombs of an altogether new type to create sources of fire in all parts 
of London. Fires everywhere. Thousands of them. Then they'll unite in one 
gigantic area conflagration. Goering has the right idea. Explosive bombs 
don't work, but it can be done with incendiary bombs— total destruction of 
London. What use will their fire department be once that really starts! 

Hamburg had put the fear of God in me. At the meeting of Central 
Planning on July 29 1 pointed out: "If the air raids continue on the present 
scale, within three months we shall be relieved of a number of questions 
we are at present discussing. We shall simply be coasting downhill, 
smoothly and relatively swiftly. . . . We might just as well hold the final 
meeting of Central Planning, in that case." Three days later I informed 
Hitler that armaments production was collapsing and threw in the further 
warning that a series of attacks of this sort, extended to six more major 
cities, would bring Germany's armaments production to a total halt.* 
"You'll straighten all that out again," he merely said. 

In fact Hitler was right. We straightened it out again— not because 
of our Central Planning organization, which with the best will in the 
world could issue only general instructions, but by the determined efforts 
of those directly concerned, first and foremost the workers themselves. 
Fortunately for us, a series of Hamburg-type raids was not repeated on 
such a scale against other cities. Thus the enemy once again allowed us 
to adjust ourselves to his strategy. 

We barely escaped a further catastrophic blow on August 17, 1943, 
only two weeks after the Hamburg bombings. The American air force 
launched its first strategic raid. It was directed against Schweinfurt where 
large factories of the ball-bearing industry were concentrated. Ball bear- 
ings had in any case already become a bottleneck in our efforts to increase 
armaments production. 

* The next day I informed Milch's colleagues of similar fears (Conference with 
chief of Air Force Procurement, August 3, 1943): "We are approaching the point of 
total collapse ... in our supply industry. Soon we will have airplanes, tanks, or 
trucks lacking certain key parts." Ten months later I said to a group of Hamburg 
dockworkers: "A while back we were saying to ourselves: If this goes on another few 
months we'll be washed up. Then armaments production will come to a standstill." 
(Office Journal.) 



285 ) Bombs 

But in this very first attack the other side committed a crucial mistake. 
Instead of concentrating on the ball-bearing plants, the sizable force of 
three hundred seventy-six Flying Fortresses divided up. One hundred and 
forty-six of the planes successfully attacked an airplane assembly plant in 
Regensburg, but with only minor consequences. Meanwhile, the British 
air force continued its indiscriminate attacks upon our cities. 

After this attack the production of ball bearings dropped by 38 per- 
cent. 12 Despite the peril to Schweinfurt we had to patch up our facilities 
there, for to attempt to relocate our ball-bearing industry would have 
held up production entirely for three or four months. In the light of our 
desperate needs we could also do nothing about the ball-bearing fac- 
tories in Berlin-Erkner, Cannstatt, or Steyr, although the enemy must 
have been aware of their location. 

In June 1946 the General Staff of the Royal Air Force asked me what 
would have been the results of concerted attacks on the ball-bearing in- 
dustry. I replied: 

Armaments production would have been crucially weakened after two 
months and after four months would have been brought completely to a 
standstill. 

This, to be sure, would have meant: 

One: All our ball-bearing factories (in Schweinfurt, Steyr, Erkner, Cann- 
statt, and in France and Italy) had been attacked simultaneously. 

Two: These attacks had been repeated three or four times, every two 
weeks, no matter what the pictures of the target area showed. 

Three: Any attempt at rebuilding these factories had been thwarted 
by further attacks, spaced at two-month intervals. 13 

After this first blow we were forced back on the ball-bearing stocks 
stored by the armed forces for use as repair parts. We soon consumed 
these, as well as whatever had been accumulated in the factories for cur- 
rent production. After these reserves were used up— they lasted for six to 
eight weeks— the sparse production was carried daily from the factories 
to the assembly plants, often in knapsacks. In those days we anxiously 
asked ourselves how soon the enemy would realize that he could paralyze 
the production of thousands of armaments plants merely by destroying 
five or six relatively small targets. 

The second serious blow, however, did not come until two months 
later. On October 14, 1943, 1 was at the East Prussian headquarters dis- 
cussing armaments questions with Hitler when Adjutant Schaub inter- 
rupted us: "The Reich Marshal urgently wishes to speak to you," he said 
to Hitler. "This time he has pleasant news." 

Hitler came back from the telephone in good spirits. A new daylight 
raid on Schweinfurt had ended with a great victory for our defenses, 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 2S6 

he said. 14 The countryside was strewn with downed American bombers. 
Uneasy, I asked for a short recess in our conference, since I wanted to 
telephone Schweinfurt myself. But all communications were shattered; I 
could not reach any of the factories. Finally, by enlisting the police, I 
managed to talk to the foreman of a ball-bearing factory. All the factories 
had been hard hit, he informed me. The oil baths for the bearings had 
caused serious fires in the machinery workshops; the damage was far 
worse than after the first attack. This time we had lost 67 percent of our 
ball-bearing production. 

My first measure after this second air raid was to appoint my most 
vigorous associate, General Manager Kessler, as special commissioner for 
ball-bearing production. Our reserves had been consumed; efforts to im- 
port ball bearings from Sweden and Switzerland had met with only slight 
success. Nevertheless, we were able to avoid total disaster by substituting 
slide bearings for ball bearings wherever possible. 15 But what really saved 
us was the fact that from this time on the enemy to our astonishment once 
again ceased his attacks on the ball-bearing industry. 16 

On December 23, the Erkner plant was heavily hit, but we were not 
sure whether this was a deliberate attack, since Berlin was being bombed 
in widely scattered areas. The picture did not change again until February 
1944. Then, within four days, Schweinfurt, Steyr, and Cannstatt were each 
subjected to two successive heavy attacks. Then followed raids on Erkner, 
Schweinfurt, and again Steyr. After only six weeks our production of bear- 
ings (above 6.3 centimeters in diameter) had been reduced to 29 percent 
of what it had been before the air raids. 17 

At the beginning of April 1944, however, the attacks on the ball-bear- 
ing industry ceased abruptly. Thus, the Allies threw away success when it 
was already in their hands. Had they continued the attacks of March and 
April with the same energy, we would quickly have been at our last gasp.* 
As it was, not a tank, plane, or other piece of weaponry failed to be pro- 
duced because of lack of ball bearings, even though such production had 
been increased by 19 percent from July 1943 to April 1944. 18 As far as 
armaments were concerned, Hitler s credo that the impossible could be 
made possible and that all forecasts and fears were too pessimistic, seemed 
to have proved itself true. 

Not until after the war did I learn the reason for the enemy's error. 

* Perhaps the enemy air staffs overrated the effects. Our Air Force General Staff 
also concluded from aerial photographs that an attack on a Soviet synthetic rubber 
factory in the fall of 1943 had completely wiped out production for many months 
to come. I showed these photos to our leading synthetic rubber specialist, Hoffmann, 
the manager of our plant in Hiils, which had undergone much more severe attacks. 
After pointing out various key sections of the plant which had not been hit, he ex- 
plained that the plant would be in full production again within a week or two. 




Hitler and Speer examining blueprints. ( spiegel-ahchiv ) 
Hitlers sketch of the domed hall, 1925. ( speer- archiv ) 



% 









mm/* 





iiiimiiiiiiiiiiii x 



WPIfllfPVPIIPRIflimillllllKIIIIKI 



' !*« 




ad .- 



i.aa. a. 



» > 



MP 

The Great Hall planned for Berlin, (evo koenig, black stau' 







jllllllllllltllllll) 



i 




# t 






Ms C :/■■■,■■'' ; 



tSfW 






■-V, -,#'?> 






£ .«^/u 




*r^f 



Ma 



J^-'J 







?rftf / Jtt 




i— 


-»*r- 


/ 






aL^SS^ 




§lp%; \ 






'/ - 34 




mMk 




lii 


'A '.-■■- ■■ ■ 


■ A^- O^v 




■ y^ ^*^. v, "^d^ 



-A- <:>.,, 



Model of Berlins neio center (Tempelhof Field, upper left). 1939. 

( SPEER-ARCHIV ) 

View from the South Station: Arch of Triumph with th( 
Great Hall at far end. ( speer-archiv ) 






above left: Entrance hall of 
Goer lags palace in Berlin, 
model. ( speer- archiv ) 

below leet: Fagade of Goerings 
palace. ( speeh-arciiiv ) 

above: A small section of 
Goerings palace, erected in 1:1 
scale, to control various details. 

( SPEER-ARCHIV ) 



/j,.j r rf \j'j,A -*J,4 ij* 



y-i&mztfrrrp povtx frrrgr ttxttz 



Hitlers design for 
monument to Mussolini. 

( SPEER-AHCHIV ) 







Hitlers rough sketch of a 
grand theater for Linz, 
which he hoped to convert 
into a metropolis. 

( SPEER-ARCHIV ) 



The Soldiers Hall, a 
memorial building to be 
opposite Goerings palace, 
model, 1Q38 (Architect: 
Wilhelm Kreis). 

( SPIEGEL-ARCHIV ) 




^i !miaiaiai3i3i3H3iai]iii 



Um " ']■"'! 4! 1 '1 >i; J]!">]i >]! 41 >II 41 ))l -V >1H 



Model of entrance to Hitlers new palace, ( speeh-arci-iiv ) 
Facade of the palace (detail). ( speer-archiv ) 




1'flTJf .MM UMtfHlHt II MfHnHIIHIi 




SS9I$BJ3&K3 



■■r'-ii.- r~i ■■-■ , ~' 



>» hiihiiimm 

5 > > j > .* , i, Z 










**** 



Hitler s sketch of a triumphal arch (enormous domed hall in the 
background), 1925. ( speer-archiv ) 



Hitler examining Speers model of the triumphal arch, presented upon 
the occasion of Hitlers fiftieth birthday in 1939. Left to right: Hitler, 
Colonel von Biiloic, unknown SS adjutant, Martin Bormann, 
Dr. Karl Brandt, Philip Bouhler, Hitler s army adjutant, Speer. 

( IIEINRICH HOFFMANN ) 



Win 
an 



■ 



rr, 



'Vh, 






I III 



iMIIII 



■Ml 1 





Hitler with his party returning from visit to Eiffel Tower 
(Jane 28, IQ40). Front row, left to right: Unknown, Hermann Giessler, 
Speer, Hitler, Arno Breker. Second row: Unknown, two of Hitler s 
adjutants, Dr. Karl Brandt, Martin Borrnann. 

( SPIEGEL- ARCHIV ) 




mm * 




Hitler visiting Paris Opera House. Speer on extreme right. 

( HEINRICH HOFFMANN ) 



t- ^^Zfc * 


.. v 


V 


L 







Margarele Speer with the pianist Alfred CortoL in Hotel Ritz, 
Paris, 1941. (speek-ahchiv) 



Bichelonne, the French Production Minister, and Speer inspecting 
the new steel works at Sahgitter, September 1943. ( speer- archiv) 





PJk 

ADOLF HITLER 



""LIN.OEN / 



BERL 




Berlin muB in kilrzester Zeit durch seine bauliche 
Neugestaltung den ihm durch die GroBe unseres Sieges zu- 
komraenden Ausdruck als Hauptstadt eines starken neuen 
Reiches erhalten. 

In der Verwirklichung dieser nunmehr w i c h - 
tigs ten Bauaufgabe des Reiches 
sehe ich den bedeutendsten Beitrag zur endgiiltigen Sicher- 
stellung unseres Sieges. 

Ihre Vollendung erwarte ich bis zum Jahre 1950. 

Das Gleiche gilt auch fur die Neugestaltung der 
Stadte Munchen, Linz, Hamburg und die Parte itagbauten 
in Nurnberg. 

Alle Lienststellen des Reiches, der Lander und 
der Stadte sowie der Partei haben dem Generalbauinspektor 
fiir die Reichshauptstadt bei der Durchflihrung seiner 
Aufgaben jede geforderte Unterstiitzung zu gewahren. 



^ ^W" 



Hitlers decree ordering Speer to concentrate all his energies upon the 
reconstruction of Berlin, Munich, Linz and Hamburg as icell as the 
party buildings in Nuremberg. Signed on June 28, Hitler deliberately 
pre-dated this decree to June 25, the day of the French capitulation. 

( BUNDESARCHIV KOBLENZ ) 



287 ) Bombs 

The air staffs assumed that in Hitler's authoritarian state the important 
factories would be quickly shifted from the imperiled cities. On December 
20, 1943, Sir Arthur Harris declared his conviction that "at this stage of 
the war the Germans have long since made every possible effort to de- 
centralize the manufacture of so vital a product [as ball bearings]. " He 
considerably overestimated the strengths of the authoritarian system, 
which to the outside observer appeared so tightly knit. 

As early as December 19, 1942, eight months before the first air raid 
on Schweinfurt, I had sent a directive to the entire armaments industry 
stating: "The mounting intensity of the enemy air attacks compels ac- 
celerated preparations for shifting manufactures important for armaments 
production." But there was resistance on all sides. The Gauleiters did not 
want new factories in their districts for fear that the almost peacetime 
quiet of their small towns would be disturbed. My band of directors, for 
their part, did not want to expose themselves to political infighting. The 
result was that hardly anything was done. 

After the second heavy raid on Schweinfurt on October 14, 1943, we 
again decided to decentralize. Some of the facilities were to be distributed 
among the surrounding villages, others placed in small and as yet unen- 
dangered towns in eastern Germany.* This policy of dispersal was meant 
to provide for the future; but the plan encountered a great deal of opposi- 
tion. As late as January 1944 ^ e shifting of ball-bearing production to 
cave factories was still being discussed, 19 and in August 1944 m y repre- 
sentative to the ball-bearing industry complained that he was having dif- 
ficulties "pushing through the construction work for the shift of ball-bear- 
ing production." 20 

Instead of paralyzing vital segments of industry, the Royal Air Force 
began an air offensive against Berlin. I was having a conference in my 
private office on November 22, 1943, when the air-raid alarm sounded. It 
was about 7:30 p.m. A large fleet of bombers was reported heading toward 
Berlin. When the bombers reached Potsdam, I called off the meeting to 
drive to a nearby flak tower, intending to watch the attack from its plat- 
form, as was my wont. But I scarcely reached the top of the tower when 
I had to take shelter inside it; in spite of the tower's stout concrete walls, 
heavy hits nearby were shaking it. Injured antiaircraft gunners crowded 
down the stairs behind me; the air pressure from the exploding bombs had 
hurled them into the walls. For twenty minutes explosion followed explo- 

* In the two months following the first attack on Schweinfurt nothing had been 
done. "The minister forcefully expressed his dissatisfaction with the measures pre- 
viously taken, asserting that the urgency of the matter required all other considerations 
to be put aside. Deeply impressed by the damage and by the minister's account of 
the potential consequences for the armaments industry, everyone readily offered all 
assistance, even the neighboring Gauleiters who would have to accept the unwelcome 
intrusions into their domains that would accompany the transfer of operations from 
Schweinfurt to their territories." (Office Journal, October 18, 1943.) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 288 

sion. From above I looked down into the well of the tower, where a close- 
ly packed crowd stood in the thickening haze formed by cement dust fall- 
ing from the walls. When the rain of bombs ceased, I ventured out on the 
platform again. My nearby Ministry was one gigantic conflagration. I 
drove over there at once. A few secretaries, looking like Amazons in their 
steel helmets, were trying to save files even while isolated time bombs 
went off in the vicinity. In place of my private office I f ound nothing but a 
huge bomb crater. 

The fire spread so quickly that nothing more could be rescued. But 
nearby was the eight-story building of the Army Ordnance Office, and 
since the fire was spreading to it and we were all nerved up from the raid 
and feeling the urge to do something, we thronged into the imperiled 
building in order at least to save the valuable special telephones. We 
ripped them from their wires and piled them up in a safe place in the base- 
ment shelter of the building. Next morning General Leeb, the chief of the 
Army Ordnance Office, visited me. "The fires in my building were extin- 
guished early in the morning hours," he informed me, grinning. "But un- 
fortunately we can't do any work now. Last night somebody ripped all the 
telephones from the walls." 

When Goering, at his country estate Karinhall, heard about that noc- 
turnal visit to the flak tower, he gave the staff there orders not to allow 
me to step out on the platform again. But by this time the officers had al- 
ready formed a friendly relationship with me that was stronger than Goe- 
ring's command. My visits to the tower were not hampered by his order. 

From the flak tower the air raids on Berlin were an unforgettable 
sight, and I had constantly to remind myself of the cruel reality in order 
not to be completely entranced by the scene: the illumination of the para- 
chute flares, which the Berliners called "Christmas trees," followed by 
flashes of explosions which were caught by the clouds of smoke, the in- 
numerable probing searchlights, the excitement when a plane was caught 
and tried to escape the cone of light, the brief flaming torch when it was 
hit. No doubt about it, this apocalypse provided a magnificent spectacle. 

As soon as the planes turned back, I drove to those districts of the 
city where important factories were situated. We drove over streets strewn 
with rubble, lined by burning houses. Bombed-out families sat or stood 
in front of the ruins. A few pieces of rescued furniture and other posses- 
sions lay about on the sidewalks. There was a sinister atmosphere full of 
biting smoke, soot, and flames. Sometimes the people displayed that curi- 
ous hysterical merriment that is often observed in the midst of disasters. 
Above the city hung a cloud of smoke that probably reached twenty thou- 
sand feet in height. Even by day it made the macabre scene as dark as 
night. 

I kept trying to describe my impressions to Hitler. But he would inter- 



289 ) Bombs 

rupt me every time, almost as soon as I began: "Incidentally, Speer, how 
many tanks can you deliver next month?" 

On November 26, 1943, four days after the destruction of my Min- 
istry, another major air raid on Berlin started huge fires in our most im- 
portant tank factory, Allkett. The Berlin central telephone exchange had 
been destroyed. My colleague Saur hit on the idea of reaching the Berlin 
fire department by way of our still intact direct line to the Fuehrers head- 
quarters. In this way Hitler, too, learned of the blaze, and without making 
any further inquiries ordered all the fire departments in the vicinity of 
Berlin to report to the burning tank plant. 

Meanwhile I had arrived at Allkett. The greater part of the main 
workshop had burned down, but the Berlin fire department had already 
succeeded in extinguishing the fire. As the result of Hitler's order, how- 
ever, a steady stream of fire equipment from cities as far away as Branden- 
burg, Oranienburg, and Potsdam kept arriving. Since a direct order from 
the Fuehrer had been issued, I could not persuade the chiefs to go on to 
other urgent fires. Early that morning the streets in a wide area around the 
tank factory were jammed with fire engines standing around doing noth- 
ing—while the fires spread unchecked in other parts of the city. 

In order to awaken my associates to the problems and anxieties about 
air armaments, Milch and I held a conference in September 1943 at the Air 
Force Experimental Center in Rechlin am Muritzsee. Among other things, 
Milch and his technical experts spoke on the future production of enemy 
aircraft. Graphs were presented for type after type of aircraft, with 
emphasis especially on American production curves as compared with our 
own. What alarmed us most were the figures on the future increase in 
four-motored daylight bombers. If these figures were accurate, what we 
were undergoing at the moment could be regarded only as a prelude. 

Naturally, the question arose as to how aware Hitler and Goering 
were of these figures. Bitterly, Milch told me that he had been trying 
for months to have his experts on enemy armaments deliver a report to 
Goering. But Goering refused to hear anything about it. The Fuehrer 
had told him it was all propaganda, Milch said, and Goering was simply 
holding to this line. I too had no luck when I tried to force these produc- 
tion figures on Hitler's attention. "Don't let them fool you. Those are all 
planted stories. Naturally those defeatists in the Air Ministry fall for 
them." With similar remarks he had thrust aside all warnings in the winter 
of 1942. Now, when our cities were one after the next being blasted into 
rubble, he would not change his tune. 

About this same time I witnessed a dramatic scene between Goering 
and General Galland, who commanded his fighter planes. Galland had 
reported to Hitler that day that several American fighter planes ac- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 2Q0 

companying the bomber squadrons had been shot down over Aachen. He 
had added the warning that we were in grave peril if American fighters, 
thanks to improved fuel capacity, should soon be able to provide escort 
protection to the fleets of bombers on flights even deeper into Germany. 
Hitler had just relayed these points to Goering. 

Goering was embarking for Rominten Heath on his special train 
when Galland came along to bid him good-by. 'What's the idea of telling 
the Fuehrer that American fighters have penetrated into the territory 
of the Reich?" Goering snapped at him. 

"Herr Reichsmarschall" Galland replied with imperturbable calm, 
"they will soon be flying even deeper ." 

Goering spoke even more vehemently: "That's nonsense, Galland, 
what gives you such fantasies? That's pure bluff!" 

Galland shook his head. "Those are the facts, Herr Reichsmarschalll" 
As he spoke he deliberately remained in a casual posture, his cap some- 
what askew, a long cigar clamped between his teeth. "American fighters 
have been shot down over Aachen. There is no doubt about it!" 

Goering obstinately held his ground: "That is simply not true, 
Galland. It's impossible." 

Galland reacted with a touch of mockery: "You might go and check 
it yourself, sir; the downed planes are there at Aachen." 

Goering tried to smooth matters over: "Come now, Galland, let me 
tell you something. I'm an experienced fighter pilot myself. I know what 
is possible. But I know what isn't, too. Admit you made a mistake." 

Galland only shook his head, until Goering finally declared: "What 
must have happened is that they were shot down much farther to the 
west. I mean, if they were very high when they were shot down they could 
have glided quite a distance farther before they crashed." 

Not a muscle moved in Galland's face. "Glided to the east, sir? If 
my plane were shot up . . ." 

"Now then, Herr Galland," Goering fulminated, trying to put an end 
to the debate, "I officially assert that the American fighter planes did 
not reach Aachen." 

The General ventured a last statement: "But, sir, they were there!" 

At this point Goering's self-control gave way. "I herewith give you an 
official order that they weren't there! Do you understand? The American 
fighters were not there! Get that! I intend to report that to the Fuehrer." 

Goering simply let General Galland stand there. But as he stalked 
off he turned once more and called out threateningly: "You have my 
official order!" 

With an unforgettable smile the General replied: "Orders are orders, 
sirr 

Goering was not actually blind to reality. I would occasionally hear 
him make perceptive comments on the situation. Rather, he acted like a 



291 ) Bombs 

bankrupt who up to the last moment wants to deceive himself along with 
his creditors. Capricious treatment and blatant refusal to accept reality 
had already driven the first chief of Air Force Procurement, the famous 
fighter pilot Ernst Udet, to his death in 1941. On August 18, 1943, another 
of Goering's closest associates and the man who had been Air Force Chief 
of Staff for over four years, General Jeschonnek, was found dead in his 
office. He too had committed suicide. On his table, so Milch told me, a 
note was found stating that he did not wish Goering to attend his funeral. 
Nevertheless Goering showed up at the ceremony and deposited a wreath 
from Hitler. 21 

I have always thought it was a most valuable trait to recognize 
reality and not to pursue delusions. But when I now think over my life 
up to and including the years of imprisonment, there was no period in 
which I was free of delusory notions. 

The departure from reality, which was visibly spreading like a 
contagion, was no peculiarity of the National Socialist regime. But in 
normal circumstances people who turn their backs on reality are soon set 
straight by the mockery and criticism of those around them, which makes 
them aware they have lost credibility. In the Third Reich there were no 
such correctives, especially for those who belonged to the upper stratum. 
On the contrary, every self-deception was multiplied as in a hall of 
distorting mirrors, becoming a repeatedly confirmed picture of a fantas- 
tical dream world which no longer bore any relationship to the grim 
outside world. In those mirrors I could see nothing but my own face 
reproduced many times over. No external factors disturbed the unif ormity 
of hundreds of unchanging faces, all mine. 

There were differences of degree in the flight from reality. Thus 
Goebbels was surely many times closer to recognizing actualities than, 
say, Goering or Ley. But these differences shrink to nothing when we 
consider how remote all of us, the illusionists as well as the so-called 
realists, were from what was really going on. 



21 
Hitler in the Autumn of 1 943 



Both his old associates and his adjutants agreed that hitler had xjn- 
dergone a change in the past year. This could scarcely be surprising, for 
during this period he had experienced Stalingrad, had looked on power- 
lessly as a quarter of a million soldiers surrendered in Tunisia, and had 
seen German cities leveled. Along with all this he had to approve the 
navy's decision to withdraw the U-boats from the Atlantic, thus relinquish- 
ing one of his greatest hopes for victory. Undoubtedly, Hitler could see the 
meaning of this turn of affairs. And undoubtedly he reacted to it as hu- 
man beings do, with disappointment, dejection, and increasingly forced 
optimism. 

In the years since then, Hitler may have become the object of sober 
studies for the historian. But for me he possesses to this day a substan- 
tiality and physical presence, as if he still existed in the flesh. Between 
the spring of 1942 and the summer of 1943 he sometimes spoke despond- 
ently. But, then, a curious transformation seemed to take place in him. 
Even in desperate situations he displayed confidence in ultimate victory. 
From this later period I can scarcely recall any remarks on the disastrous 
course of affairs, although I was expecting them. Had he gone on for so 
long persuading himself that he now firmly believed in victory? At any 
rate, the more inexorably events moved toward catastrophe, the more 
inflexible he became, the more rigidly convinced that everything he de- 
cided on was right. 

( *9* ) 



293 ) Hitler in the Autumn of 1943 

His closest associates noted his growing inaccessibility. He deliber- 
ately made his decisions in isolation. At the same time he had grown in- 
tellectually more sluggish and showed little inclination to develop new 
ideas. It was as if he were running along an unalterable track and could 
no longer find the strength to break out of it. 

Underlying all this was the impasse into which he had been driven 
by the superior power of his enemies. In January 1943 they had jointly 
issued a demand for Germany's unconditional surrender. Hitler was prob- 
ably the only German leader who entertained no illusions about the seri- 
ousness of this statement. Goebbels, Goering, and the others would talk 
about exploiting the political antagonisms among the Allies. Still others 
imagined that Hitler would find some political device by which he could 
save the situation, even now. After all, had he not earlier, starting with 
the occupation of Austria up to the pact with the Soviet Union, contrived 
with apparent ease a succession of new tricks, new shifts, new finesses? 
But now, during the situation conferences, he more and more often de- 
clared: "Don't fool yourself. There is no turning back. We can only move 
forward. We have burned our bridges." In speaking this way Hitler was 
cutting his government off from any negotiation. The meaning of these 
words was first fully revealed at the Nuremberg Trial. 

One of the causes for the changes in Hitler's personality, so I thought 
at the time, was the constant stress under which he labored. He was 
working in an unaccustomed way. Since the beginning of the Russian 
campaign he had abandoned his former staccato method of administering 
the affairs of government in flurries of activity, with spells of indolence 
in between. Instead, he regularly attended to an enormous daily mass of 
work. Whereas in the past he had known how to let others work for him, 
he now assumed more and more responsibility for details. As anxieties 
mounted, he made himself into a strictly disciplined worker. But such dis- 
cipline ran counter to his nature, and this was inevitably reflected in the 
quality of his decisions. 

It is true that even before the war Hitler had shown signs of over- 
work. At times he would be distinctly averse to making decisions, would 
appear absent-minded, and would relapse into painful spells of monologu- 
ing. Or else he would fall into a sort of muteness or would say nothing 
more than an occasional "yes" or "no." At such times it was not clear 
whether he still had his mind on the subject or was brooding on other 
thoughts. Earlier, however, these states of exhaustion did not usually last 
long. After staying at Obersalzberg for a few weeks he would appear 
more relaxed. His eyes would be brighter, his capacity for reaction would 
have increased, and he would recover his pleasure in state business. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 2Q4 

In 1943, too, his entourage frequently urged him to take a vacation. 
At such times he would change the location of his headquarters and 
would go for weeks and sometimes even for months to Obersalzberg.* 
But these vacations did not involve any change in his daily routine. Bor- 
mann was always hovering nearby, with endless small questions which 
the Fuehrer had to settle. There was a stream of callers, Gauleiters or 
ministers who could not obtain admission to headquarters and who now 
insisted on seeing him. Along with all this the lengthy daily situation con- 
ferences went on, for the entire military staff came along to wherever 
Hitler happened to be staying. Hitler frequently said, when we expressed 
concern for his health: "It's easy to advise me to take a vacation. But it's 
impossible. I cannot leave current military decisions to others even for 
twenty-four hours." 

The people in Hitler's military entourage had been used to con- 
centrated daily work from their youth. They could not have realized how 
overstrained Hitler was. Bormann, likewise, seemed unable to understand 
that he was asking too much of Hitler. But even apart from this, Hitler 
neglected to do what every factory executive must do: appoint good depu- 
ties for each important phase of his work. He had neither a competent 
executive chief nor a vigorous head of the armed forces nor even a capable 
Commander in Chief of the army. He continually flouted the old rule that 
the higher his position the more free time a man should have available. 
Formerly, he had abided by this rule. 

Overwork and isolation led to a peculiar state of petrifaction and 
rigor. He suffered from spells of mental torpor and was permanently 
caustic and irritable. Earlier, he had made decisions with almost sportive 
ease; now, he had to force them out of his exhausted brain. 1 As a former 
racing shell crewman I knew about the phenomenon of overtraining. I 
remembered how, when we reached such a state, our performance 
dropped, we became dull and irritable and lost all flexibility. We would 
become automatons to such an extent that a rest period seemed actually 
unwelcome and all we wanted was to go on training. Excessive intellec- 
tual strain can produce similar symptoms. During the difficult days of 
the war, I could observe in myself how my mind went on working me- 
chanically, while at the same time my ability to absorb fresh impressions 
diminished and I made decisions in an apathetic way. 

The fact that Hitler left the darkened Chancellery in silence and 
secrecy on the night of September 3, 1939, in order to go to the front, 
proved to be a step of high significance for the subsequent years. His 

* During the twenty months from July 28, 1941, to March 20, 1943, Hitler 
interrupted his stay in Rastenburg four times, for a total of fifty-seven days. Beginning 
on March 20, 1943, on his doctor's urging, he went to Obersalzberg for a three-month 
vacation and then worked for the next nine months in Rastenburg. After this, com- 
pletely exhausted, he spent the four months after March 16, 1944, at Obersalzberg 
and in Berlin. (Domarus, Hitlers Reden, Vol. IV [Munich, 1965].) 



295 ) Hitler in the Autumn of 1943 

relationship to the people had changed. Even when he did come into 
contact with the populace— at intervals of many months— their enthusiasm 
and capacity to respond to him had faded and his magnetic power over 
them seemed likewise to have fled. 

In the early thirties, during the final phases of the struggle for power, 
Hitler had driven himself as hard as during the second half of the war. 
But he probably drew more impetus and courage from those mass meet- 
ings than he himself had poured out upon the multitude. Even during the 
period between 1933 and 1939, when his position made life easier for 
him, he was visibly refreshed by the daily procession of admirers who 
came to pay homage to him at Obersalzberg. The rallies in the prewar 
period had also been a stimulant to Hitler. They were part of his life, and 
each one left him more incisive and self-assured than he had been before. 

The private circle— his secretaries, doctors, and adjutants— in which 
he moved at headquarters was, if possible, even less stimulating than the 
prewar circle at Obersalzberg had been, or the circle in the Chancellery. 
Here there were no people so carried away by his aura that they could 
hardly speak. Daily association with Hitler, as I had already observed in 
the days when he and I dreamed together over building projects, reduced 
him from the demigod Goebbels had made of him to a human being with 
all ordinary human needs and weaknesses, although his authority re- 
mained intact. 

Hitler's military entourage, too, must have been tiring to him. For 
in the matter-of-fact atmosphere of headquarters any touch of idolatry 
would have made a bad impression. On the contrary, the military officers 
remained distinctly dispassionate. Even had they not been so by nature, 
restrained etiquette was part of their training. For that reason the Byzan- 
tine flatteries of Keitel and Goering seemed all the more obtrusive. More- 
over, they did not sound genuine. Hitler himself encouraged his military 
entourage not to be servile. In that atmosphere objectivity remained the 
dominant note. 

Hitler would not listen to criticism about his own life pattern. Con- 
sequently, members of his entourage had to conceal their worries and 
accept his habits for what they were. More and more he avoided conver- 
sations of a personal nature, aside from the rare sentimental talks he had 
with a few of his comrades from the early days, such as Goebbels, Ley, 
or Esser. To me and others he spoke in an impersonal, rather aloof man- 
ner. Occasionally, Hitler still made decisions alertly and spontaneously, 
as he had in the past, and once in a long while he would even listen 
attentively to opposing arguments. But these times had become so unusual 
that we afterward made special note of them. 

Schmundt and I hit on the idea of bringing young frontline officers 
to Hitler, in order to introduce a little of the mood of the outside world 
into the stale, hermetic atmosphere of the headquarters. But our efforts 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 2g6 

came to nought. For one thing Hitler seemed unwilling to spare the time 
for such things, and then we also realized that these interviews did more 
harm than good. For example, a young tank officer reported that during 
the advance along the Terek his unit had encountered hardly any re- 
sistance and had had to check the advance only because it ran out of 
ammunition. In his overwrought state of mind, Hitler kept brooding on 
the matter for days afterward. "There you have it! Too little ammunition 
for the 7.5 centimeter guns! What's the matter with production? It must 
be increased at once by every possible means." Actually, given our 
limited facilities there was enough of this ammunition available; but the 
supply lines were so overextended that the supplies had not caught up 
with the tempestuous advance of the tank troops. Hitler, however, re- 
fused to take this factor into account. 

On such occasions the young frontline officers would disclose other 
details into which Hitler immediately read major errors of omission on 
the part of the General Staff. In reality most of the difficulties arose from 
the tempo of the advances, which Hitler insisted on. It was impossible 
for the army staff to discuss this matter with him, since he had no 
knowledge of the complicated logistics involved in such advances. 

At long intervals Hitler still continued to receive officers and en- 
listed men on whom he was to confer high military decorations. Given 
his distrust in the competence of his staff, there were often dramatic 
scenes and peremptory orders after such visits. In order to avert such 
complications, Keitel and Schmundt did their best to neutralize the visitors 
beforehand, insofar as they could. 

Hitler's evening tea, to which he invited guests even at headquarters, 
had in the course of time been shifted to two o'clock in the morning and 
did not end before three or four o'clock. The time when he went to bed 
had also been shifted more and more into the early morning, so that I once 
commented: "If the war goes on much longer we'll at least come around 
to the normal working hours of an early riser and take Hitler's evening tea 
as our breakfast." 

Hitler unquestionably suffered from insomnia. He spoke of the agony 
of lying awake if he went to bed earlier. During the tea he would often 
complain that the day before he had only been able to snatch a few 
hours of rest in the morning, after many hours of sleeplessness. 

Only the intimates were admitted to these teas: his doctors, his sec- 
retaries, his military and civilian adjutants, the press chiefs deputy, the 
Foreign Ministry's representative, Ambassador Hewel, sometimes his 
Viennese diet cook, such visitors as were close to Hitler, and the inevi- 
table Bormann. I too was welcome as a guest anytime. We sat stiffly in 
Hitlers dining room in uncomfortable armchairs. On these occasions 
Hitler still loved a gemutlich atmosphere, with, if possible, a fire in the 



297 ) Hitler in the Autumn of 1943 

fireplace. He passed cake to the secretaries with emphatic gallantry and 
tried to achieve a tone of friendliness with his guests like an easy-going 
host. I felt pity for him; there was always something misbegotten about 
his attempts to radiate warmth in order to receive it. 

Since music was banned at headquarters, there remained only con- 
versation, with Hitler himself doing most of the talking. His familiar 
jokes were appreciated as if they had been heard for the first time; his 
stories of his harsh youth or the "days of struggle" were listened to as 
raptly as if they were being told for the first time; but this circle could 
not whip up much liveliness or contribute to the conversation. It was an 
unwritten law that events at the front, politics, or criticism of leaders 
must be avoided. Naturally, Hitler, too, had no need to talk about such 
matters. Only Bormann had the privilege of making provocative remarks. 
Sometimes, too, a letter from Eva Braun would send Hitler into a fit, 
for she was apt to cite cases of blatant stupidity on the part of officials. 
When, for example, regulations were issued forbidding the people of 
Munich from going to the mountains for skiing, Hitler became extremely 
excited and launched into tirades about his everlasting struggle against 
the idiocy of the bureaucracy. In the end, Bormann would be ordered to 
look into such cases. 

The banality of the subjects indicated that Hitler's threshold of irri- 
tability had become extremely low. On the other hand, such trivialities 
really had a kind of relaxing effect on him, since they led him back to a 
world in which he could still issue effective orders. For the moment at 
least he could forget the impotence that had plagued him since his 
enemies had begun to shape the course of events. 

Even though he still played at being master of the situation and his 
circle did its best to abet him in his illusions, elements of the truth forced 
themselves upon his consciousness. At such moments, he would go back 
to his old litany that he had become a politician against his will, that 
basically he was an architect but that he had been out of luck: The kind 
of projects that would have suited his talents were not being built. Only 
when he himself was head of government was the right kind of building 
possible. He had only one remaining wish, he would say in one of those 
bursts of self-pity which became more and more frequent these days. "As 
soon as possible I want to hang the field-gray jacket on its nail again.* 
When I have ended the war victoriously, my life's task will be fulfilled, and 
I'll withdraw to the home of my old age, in Linz, across the Danube. Then 
my successor can worry about these problems." He had, it is true, some- 
times spoken in this vein before the beginning of the war, during those 

* Since the beginning of the war he had worn military dress rather than his old 
party uniform, and he had promised the Reichstag that he would not put it aside until 
the war was over— just as Isabella of Castile had once sworn not to take off her chemise 
until the country was liberated from the Moors. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 2g8 

more relaxed teatimes at Obersalzberg. But in those days, I suspect, all 
that was mere coquettishness. Now, he formulated such thoughts unsen- 
timentally, in a normal conversational tone and with a credible note of 
bitterness. 

His abiding interest in the plans for the city of his retirement years 
also gradually assumed an escapist character. Toward the end of the war, 
Hermann Giessler, the chief architect of Linz, was summoned to head- 
quarters more and more frequently to present his designs, whereas Hitler 
scarcely ever asked for the Hamburg, Berlin, Nuremberg, or Munich 
plans, which had previously meant so much to him. When he considered 
the torments he now had to endure, he would say gloomily, death could 
only mean a release for him. In keeping with this mood, when he studied 
the Linz plans he would repeatedly turn to the sketches for his tomb, 
which was to be located in one of the towers of the Linz complex of party 
buildings. Even after a victorious war, he emphasized, he did not want 
to be buried beside his field marshals in the Soldiers Hall in Berlin. 

During these nocturnal conversations in the Ukrainian or East Prus- 
sian headquarters, Hitler often gave the impression of being slightly un- 
balanced. The leaden heaviness of the early morning hours weighed on 
those few of us who participated. Only politeness and a sense of duty 
could induce us to attend the teas. For after the day of strenuous con- 
ferences, we could scarcely keep our eyes open during the monotonous 
conversations. 

Before Hitler appeared, someone might ask: "Say, where is Morell 
this evening?" 

Someone else would reply crossly: "He hasn't been here the past 
three evenings." 

One of the secretaries: "He could stand staying up late once in a 
while. It's always the same I'd love to sleep too/' 

Another: "We really should arrange to take turns. It isn't fair for 
some to shirk and the same people have to be here all the tune." 

Of course Hitler was still revered by this circle, but his nimbus was 
distinctly wearing thin. 

After Hitler had eaten breakfast late in the morning, the daily news- 
papers and press information sheets were presented to him. The press 
reports were crucially important in forming his opinions; they also had a 
great deal to do with his mood. Where specific foreign news items were 
concerned, he instantly formulated the official German position, usually 
highly aggressive, which he would then dictate word for word to his press 
chief, Dr. Dietrich, or to Dietrich's deputy, Lorenz. Hitler would boldly 
intrude on all areas of government, usually without consulting the min- 
isters in question, such as Goebbels or Ribbentrop, or even bothering to 
inform them beforehand. 



*99 ) Hitler in the Autumn of 1943 

After that, Hewel reported on foreign events, which Hitler took 
more calmly than he did the press notices. In hindsight it seems to me 
that he considered the reverberations more important than the realities; 
that the newspaper accounts interested him more than the events them- 
selves. 

Schaub then brought in the reports of last night's air raids, which 
had been passed on from the Gauleiters to Bormann. Since I often went 
to look at the production facilities in the damaged cities a day or two 
later, I can judge that Hitler was correctly informed on the degree of 
destruction. It would in fact have been unwise of a Gauleiter to minimize 
the damage, since his prestige could only increase if, in spite of the devas- 
tation, he succeeded in restoring normal life and production. 

Hitler was obviously shaken by these reports, although less by the 
casualties among the populace or the bombing of residential areas than 
by the destruction of valuable buildings, especially theaters. As in his 
plans for the "reshaping of German cities" before the war, he was pri- 
marily interested in public architecture and seemed to give little thought 
to social distress and human misery. Consequently, he was likely to de- 
mand that burned-out theaters be rebuilt immediately. Several times I 
tried to remind him of other strains upon the construction industry. Appar- 
ently the local political authorities were also less than eager to carry out 
these unpopular orders, and Hitler, in any case sufficiently taken up by the 
military situation, seldom inquired about the way the work was going. 
Only in Munich, his second home, and in Berlin did he insist that the 
opera houses be rebuilt at great expenditure of labor and money. 2 

Incidentally, Hitler betrayed a remarkable ignorance of the true 
situation and the mood of the populace when he answered all objections 
with: "Theatrical performances are needed precisely because the morale 
of the people must be maintained." The urban population certainly had 
other things to worry about. Once more, such remarks showed to what 
extent Hitler was rooted in a "bourgeois milieu." 

While reading these reports, Hitler was in the habit of raging against 
the British government and the Jews, who were to blame for these air 
raids. We could force the enemy to stop by building a large fleet of 
bombers ourselves, he declared. Whenever I objected that we had neither 
the planes nor explosives for heavy bombing, 3 he always returned the 
same answer: "You've made so many things possible, Speer. Youll man- 
age that too." It seems to me, in retrospect, that our ability to produce 
more and more in spite of the air raids must have been one of the reasons 
that Hitler did not really take the air battle over Germany seriously. Con- 
sequently, Milch's and my proposals that the manufacture of bombers 
be radically reduced in favor of increased fighter-plane production was 
rejected until it was too late. 

I tried a few times to persuade Hitler to travel to the bombed cities 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 3OO 

and let himself be seen there. 4 Goebbels, too, had tried to put over the 
same idea, but in vain. He lamented Hitlers obstinacy and referred en- 
viously to the conduct of Churchill: "When I think of the propaganda 
value I could make of such a visit!" But Hitler regularly brushed away 
any such suggestion. During his drives from Stettin Station to the Chan- 
cellery, or to his apartment in Prinzregentenstrasse in Munich, he now 
ordered his chauffeur to take the shortest route, whereas he formerly 
loved long detours. Since I accompanied him several times on such drives, 
I saw with what absence of emotion he noted the new areas of rubble 
through which his car would pass. 

Morell had advised Hitler to take long walks, and it would indeed 
have been very easy to lay out a few paths in the adjacent East Prussian 
woods. But Hitler vetoed any such project. The result was that his daily 
airing consisted of a small circuit barely a hundred yards long within 
Restricted Area I. 

On these walks Hitlers interest was usually focused not on his 
companions but on his Alsatian dog Blondi. He used these intervals for 
training purposes. After a few exercises in fetching, the dog had to 
balance on a board about a foot wide and twenty-five feet long, mounted 
at a height of more than six feet. Hitler knew, of course, that a dog re- 
gards the man who feeds him as his master. Before the attendant opened 
the dog cage, Hitler usually let the excited dog leap up against the wire 
partitions for a few minutes, barking and whimpering with joy and 
hunger. Since I stood in special favor, I was sometimes allowed to accom- 
pany Hitler to this feeding, whereas all the others had to watch the pro- 
cess at a distance. The dog probably occupied the most important role 
in Hitler s private life; he meant more to his master than the Fuehrer s 
closest associates. 

Hitler frequently took his meals alone when no guest he liked was 
at headquarters. In that case only the dog kept him company. As a mat- 
ter of course, during my two- or three-day stays at headquarters I was 
asked to dine with the Fuehrer once or twice. People no doubt thought 
we were discussing important general matters or personal subjects during 
these meals. But even I found there was no talking with Hitler about 
broader aspects of the military situation, or even the economic situation. 
We stuck to trivial subjects or dreary production figures. 

Initially, he remained interested in the matters that had absorbed 
both of us in the past, such as the future shaping of German cities. He 
also wanted to plan a transcontinental railroad network which would 
link his future empire together economically. After he decided on the 
size of the wide-gauge track he wanted for the railroad, he began con- 
sidering various car types and plunging into detailed calculations on 



30i ) Hitler in the Autumn of 1943 

freight tonnages. Such matters occupied him during his sleepless nights.* 
The Transportation Ministry thought that the drawbacks of two railroad 
systems more than outweighed the possible advantages, but Hitler had 
become obsessed with this idea; he decided that it was even more im- 
portant as a binding force in his empire than the autobahn system. 

From month to month Hitler became more taciturn. It may also be 
that he let himself go with me and made less of an effort at conversation 
than he did with other guests. In any case, from the autumn of 1943 on, 
a lunch with him became an ordeal. In silence, we spooned up our soup. 
While we waited for the next course we might make a few remarks about 
the weather, whereupon Hitler would usually say something acid about 
the incompetence of the weather bureau. Finally the conversation would 
revert to the quality of the food. He was highly pleased with his diet 
cook and praised her skill at vegetarian cuisine. If a dish seemed to him 
especially good, he asked me to have a taste of it. 

He was forever worried about gaining weight. "Out of the question! 
Imagine me going around with a potbelly. It would mean political ruin. ,, 
After making such remarks he would frequently call his orderly, to put 
an end to temptation: "Take this away, please, I like it too much." Inci- 
dentally, even here at headquarters he would often make fun of meat- 
eaters, but he did not attempt to sway me. He even had no objection to a 
Steinhager after fatty food— although he commented pityingly that he did 
not need it, with his fare. If there were a meat broth I could depend on 
his speaking of "corpse tea"; in connection with crayfish he brought out 
his story of a deceased grandmother whose relations had thrown her body 
into the brook to lure the crustaceans; for eels, that they were best fat- 
tened and caught by using dead cats. 

Earlier, during those evenings in the Chancellery, Hitler had never 
been shy about repeating stories as often as he pleased. But now, in these 
times of retreats and impending doom, such repetitions had to be re- 
garded as signs that he was in an especially good humor. For most of the 
time a deadly silence prevailed. I had the impression of a man whose life 
was slowly ebbing away. 

During conferences that often lasted for hours, or during meals, 
Hitler ordered his dog to he down in a certain corner. There the animal 
settled w'th a protesting growl. If he felt that he was not being watched, 
he crawled closer to his master s seat and after elaborate maneuvers finally 
landed with his snout against Hitler's knee, whereupon a sharp command 

* The idea behind this transcontinental service was that a single train would 
transport as much as a freighter. Hitler felt that sea travel was never sufficiently safe 
and was certainly unreliable in wartime. Even where plans for new railroad facilities 
had already been completed, as in Berlin and Munich, an extra pair of tracks had to 
be added for Hitler's new railroad system. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 302 

banished him to his corner again. I avoided, as did any reasonably pru- 
dent visitor to Hitler, arousing any feelings of friendship in the dog. That 
was often not so easy, especially when at meals the dog laid his head on 
my knee and in this position attentively studied the pieces of meat, which 
he evidently preferred to his master's vegetarian dishes. When Hitler 
noticed such disloyalty, he irritably called the dog back. But still the dog 
remained the only living creature at headquarters who aroused any flicker 
of human feeling in Hitler. Only— the dog was mute. 

Hitlers deep estrangement from people proceeded slowly, almost 
imperceptibly. From about the autumn of 1943 on, he used to make one 
remark which was all too revealing of his unhappy isolation: "Speer, one 
of these days 111 have only two friends left, Fraulein Braun and my dog." 
His tone was so misanthropic, and the remark seemed to be wrung from 
such depths that it would not have done for me to assure him of my own 
loyalty. That was the one and only prediction of Hitler's that proved to 
be absolutely right. But that those two remained true to him was certainly 
no credit to Hitler, but rather to the staunchness of his mistress and the 
dependency of his dog. 

Later, in my many years of imprisonment, I discovered what it meant 
to live under great psychological pressure. Only then did I realize that 
Hitler s life had borne a great resemblance to that of a prisoner. His bunk- 
er, although it did not yet have the tomblike proportions it was to assume 
in July 1944, had the thick walls and ceilings of a prison. Iron doors and 
iron shutters guarded the few openings, and even his meager walks within 
the barbed wire brought him no more fresh air and contact with nature 
than a prisoner s endless tramp around the prison yard. 

Hitler's hour came when the main situation conference began after 
lunch, around two o'clock. Outwardly, the scene had not changed since 
the spring of 1942. Almost the same generals and adjutants gathered 
around the big map table. Only now all the participants seemed to have 
been aged and worn by the events of the past year and a half. Indifferent 
and rather resigned, they received his watchwords and commands. 

Positive aspects were played up. From the testimony of prisoners 
and special reports from the Russian front, it might appear that the enemy 
would soon be exhausted. The Russian casualties seemed to be much 
higher than ours because of their offensives— higher even in proportion 
to the relative sizes of our populations. Reports of insignificant successes 
loomed larger and larger in the course of these discussions, until they 
had become for Hitler incontrovertible evidence that Germany would 
after all be able to delay the Soviet onslaught until the Russians had been 
bled white. Moreover, many of us believed that Hitler would end the war 
at the right time. 



303 ) Hitler in the Autumn of 1943 

To forecast what we might expect in the next few months, Jodl pre- 
pared a report to Hitler. At the same time he tried to revive his real job 
as chief of the Armed Forces Operations Staff, which Hitler had more 
and more taken over. Jodl knew well Hitler s distrust for arguments based 
on calculations. Toward the end of 1943, Hitler was still speaking scorn- 
fully of a projection by General Georg Thomas which had rated the 
Soviet war potential as extremely high. Hitler was irate over this memo- 
randum, and soon after its presentation he had forbidden Thomas and 
the OKW to undertake any further studies of this type. When around 
the autumn of 1944 my planning board, in an earnest effort to help the 
military operations staff make its decisions, worked out a memorandum 
on the enemy's armaments capacities, we received a reprimand from 
Keitel and were told not to transmit such documents to the OKW. 

Thus, Jodl knew that there were serious barriers that prevented him 
from delivering his report. He therefore appointed a young air force 
colonel named Christian to give a quick sketch of the matter at one of the 
situation conferences. The colonel had the rather significant advantage of 
being married to one of Hitlers secretaries, one of those who belonged 
to the nightly teatime circle. The idea was to discern the enemy's possible 
long-run tactical plans and what the consequences would be for us. But 
aside from the scene of Colonel Christian's showing a completely silent 
Hitler various places on several large maps of Europe, I no longer recall 
what happened with this attempt. In any case, it failed miserably. 

Without much fuss, and without any rebellion on the part of those 
concerned, Hitler continued to make all decisions himself, in total disre- 
gard of any technical basis. He dispensed with analyses of the situation 
and logistical calculations. He did not rely on any study group which 
would examine all aspects of offensive plans in terms of their effective- 
ness and possible countermeasures by the enemy. The headquarters 
staffs were more than competent to carry out these functions of modern 
warfare; it would only have been necessary to activate them. To be sure, 
Hitler would accept information about partial aspects of situations; but 
the grand synthesis was supposed to be born solely in his head. His field 
marshals as well as his closest associates had, therefore, merely advisory 
functions, for his decision had usually been forged beforehand and only 
minor aspects of it were subject to change. Moreover, whatever he had 
learned from the eastern campaign in the years 1942-43 was rigorously re- 
pressed. Decisions were made in a total vacuum. 

At headquarters, where everyone lived under the tremendous pres- 
sure of responsibility, probably nothing was more welcome than a dictate 
from above. That meant being freed of a decision and simultaneously be- 
ing provided with an excuse for failure. Only rarely did I hear of a mem- 
ber of the headquarters staff applying for frontline service in order to 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 304 

escape the permanent conflicts of conscience to which all at headquarters 
were exposed. To this day the whole thing remains an enigma for me. 
For in spite of a great deal of criticism hardly any one of us ever managed 
to put across our reservations. Actually, we were hardly conscious of 
them. In the stupefying world of the headquarters we remained unmoved 
by what Hitler s decisions must mean at the front, where men were fight- 
ing and dying. Yet time and again our men found themselves in emergen- 
cies that could have been avoided had Hitler not staved off a retreat pro- 
posed by the General Staff. 

No one could expect the Chief of State to go to the front regularly. 
But as Commander in Chief of the army, who moreover decided on so 
many details himself, he was obliged to do so. If he were too ill, then he 
should have appointed someone else; if he were fearful for his life, he had 
no right to be Commander in Chief of the army. 

A few trips to the front could easily have shown him and his staff 
the fundamental errors that were costing so much blood. But Hitler and 
his military advisers thought they could lead the army from their maps. 
They knew nothing of the Russian winter and its road conditions, nor 
of the hardships of soldiers who had to live in holes in the ground, with- 
out quarters, inadequately equipped, exhausted and half frozen. Their 
resistance had long since been shattered. At the situation conferences 
Hitler took these units as up to full strength, and under that delusion 
they were committed. He pushed about on the map divisions that had 
worn themselves out in previous fighting and now lacked arms and am- 
munition. Moreover, Hitler frequently set schedules that were completely 
unrealistic. Since he invariably ordered immediate action, the advance 
detachments came under fire before the task force could bring its full fire 
power to bear. The result was that the men were led piecemeal up to the 
enemy and slowly annihilated. 

The communications apparatus at headquarters was remarkable for 
that period. It was possible to communicate directly with all the impor- 
tant theaters of war. But Hitler overestimated the merits of the telephone, 
radio, and teletype. For thanks to this apparatus the responsible army 
commanders were robbed of every chance for independent action, in con- 
trast to earlier wars. Hitler was constantly intervening on their sectors 
of the front. Because of this communications apparatus individual divi- 
sions in all the theaters of war could be directed from Hitler s table in 
the situation room. The more fearful the situation, the greater was the 
gulf modern technology created between reality and the fantasies with 
which the man at this table operated. 

Military leadership is primarily a matter of intelligence, tenacity, and 
iron nerves. Hitler thought he had all these qualities in far greater meas- 
ure than his generals. Again and again he predicted, although only after 
the disaster of the winter of 1941-42, that even the worst situations could 



305 ) Hitler in the Autumn of 1943 

be overcome and, indeed, that only in such situations would he prove 
how firmly he stood and how sound his nerves were.* 

Such remarks were scarcely complimentary toward the officers pres- 
ent; but Hitler was often capable of turning to the General Staff of- 
ficers of his entourage and insulting them directly. He would tell them 
that they were not steadfast, that they were always wanting to retreat, 
that they were prepared to give up ground without any reason. These 
cowards on the General Staff would never have dared to start a war, he 
would say; they had always advised against it, always maintained that 
our forces were far too weak. But who had been proved right, if not him- 
self I He would run down the usual list of earlier military successes and 
review the negative attitudes of the General Staff before these operations 
began— which produced a ghostly impression, given the situation that had 
meanwhile arisen. In going over the past that way he might lose his tem- 
per, flush deeply, and in a rapid, loud voice breaking with excitement 
burst out: "They aren't only notorious cowards, they're dishonest as well. 
They're notorious liars! The training of the General Staff is a school of 
lying and deception. Zeitzler, these figures are false! You yourself are 
being lied to. Believe me, the situation is deliberately being represented 
as unfavorable. That's how they want to force me to authorize retreats!" 

Invariably, Hitler ordered the bends in the front to be held at all 
costs, and just as invariably the Soviet forces would overrun the posi- 
tion after a few days or weeks. Then there followed new rages, mingled 
with fresh denunciations of the officers and, frequently, complaints against 
the German soldiers: "The soldier of the First World War was much 
tougher. Think of all they had to go through, in Verdun, on the Somme. 
Today, they would run away from that land of thing." 

A good many of the officers who came in for these tongue-lashings 
later joined the July 20, 1944, conspiracy against Hitler. That plot cast its 
shadow before. In the past Hitler had had a fine sense of discrimination 
and was able to adapt his language to the people around him. Now he 
was unrestrained and reckless. His speech became an overflowing torrent 
like that of a prisoner who betrays dangerous secrets even to his pros- 
ecutor. In his talk Hitler seemed to me to be obeying an obsession. 

In order to supply evidence for posterity that he had always issued 
the right orders, as early at the late autumn of 1942, Hitler sent for certi- 
fied stenographers from the Reichstag who from then on sat at the table 
during the situation conference and took down every word. 

Sometimes, when Hitler thought he had found the way out of a 

* On July 26, 1944, Hitler boasted to the heads of industry: "All I know is that 
unprecedentedly strong nerves and unprecedented resolution are necessary if a leader 
is to survive in times such as these and make decisions which concern our very 
existence. . . . Any other man in my place would have been unable to do what I 
have done; his nerves would not have been strong enough." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 306 

dilemma, he would add: "Have you got that? Yes, someday people will 
see that I was right. But these idiotic General Staff officers refuse to 
believe me." Even when the troops were retreating, he would declare 
triumphantly: "Didn't I order so and so three days ago? Again my order 
hasn't been carried out. They don't carry out my orders and afterward 
they He and blame the Russians. They He when they say the Russians pre- 
vented them from carrying out the order." Hitler refused to admit that 
his failures were due to the weak position into which he had cast us by 
insisting on a war on many fronts. 

Only a few months before, the stenographers who unexpectedly found 
themselves in this madhouse had probably envisioned Hitler as a superior 
genius, just as Goebbels had taught them. Here they were forced to 
catch a glimpse of the reaHty. I can still see them distinctly as they sat 
writing, sallow-faced, or in their free time pacing back and forth at 
headquarters with a downcast air. They seemed to me Hke envoys from 
the populace who were condemned to witness the tragedy from front-row 
seats. 

At the beginning of the war in the east, Hitler, captive to his theory 
that the Slavs were subhuman, had caUed the war against them child's 
play. But the longer the war lasted, the more the Russians gained his 
respect. He was impressed by the stoicism with which they had accepted 
their early defeats. He spoke admiringly of Stalin, particularly stressing 
the parallels to his own endurance. The danger that hung over Moscow 
in the winter of 1941 struck him as similar to his present predicament. 
In a brief access of confidence, 5 he might remark with a jesting tone of 
voice that it would be best, after victory over Russia, to entrust the ad- 
ministration of the country to Stalin, under German hegemony, of course, 
since he was the best imaginable man to handle the Russians. In gen- 
eral he regarded Stalin as a kind of colleague. When Stalin's son was 
taken prisoner it was out of this respect, perhaps, that Hitler ordered him 
to be given especiaUy good treatment. Much had changed since that 
day after the armistice with France when Hitler predicted that a war with 
the Soviet Union would be child's play. 

In contrast to his ultimate realization that he was dealing with a 
formidable enemy in the east, Hitler clung to the end to his preconceived 
opinion that the troops of the Western countries were poor fighting 
material. Even the AlHed successes in Africa and Italy could not shake 
his beHef that these soldiers would run away from the first serious on- 
slaught. He was convinced that democracy enfeebled a nation. As late as 
the summer of 1944 he held to his theory that all the ground that had 
been lost in the West would be quickly reconquered. His opinions on the 
Western statesmen had a similar bias. He considered Churchill, as he 
often stated during the situation conferences, an incompetent, alcohoHc 



307 ) Hitler in the Autumn of 1943 

demagogue. And he asserted in all seriousness that Roosevelt was not a 
victim of infantile paralysis but of syphilitic paralysis and was therefore 
mentally unsound. These opinions, too, were indications of his flight 
from reality in the last years of his life. 

Within Restricted Area I in Rastenburg a teahouse had been built. 
Its furnishings were a pleasant change from the general drabness. Here 
we occasionally met for a glass of vermouth; here field marshals waited 
before conferring with Hitler. He himself avoided this teahouse and thus 
escaped encounters with the generals and staff officers of the High Com- 
mand and of the armed forces. But for a few days, after Fascism had 
ingloriously come to an end in Italy on July 25, 1943, and Badoglio had 
taken over the government, Hitler sat there over tea several afternoons 
with perhaps ten of his military and political associates, among them 
Keitel, Jodl, and Bormann. Suddenly, Jodl blurted out: "Come to think of 
it, Fascism simply burst like a soap bubble." A horrified silence followed, 
until someone launched another subject, whereupon Jodl, visibly alarmed, 
flushed beet red. 

A few weeks afterward Prince Philip of Hesse was invited to the 
headquarters. He was one of the few followers whom Hitler always 
treated with deference and respect. Philip had often been useful to 
him, and especially in the early years of the Third Reich had arranged 
contacts with the heads of Italian Fascism. In addition he had helped 
Hitler purchase valuable art works. The Prince had been able to arrange 
their export from Italy through his connections with the Italian royal 
house, to which he was related. 

When the Prince wanted to leave again after a few days, Hitler 
bluntly told him that he would not be allowed to leave headquarters. 
He continued to treat him with the greatest outward courtesy and invited 
him to his meals. But the members of Hitler s entourage, who until then 
had been so fond of talking with a "real prince," avoided him as if he had 
a contagious disease. On September 9, Prince Philip and Princess Mafalda, 
the Italian King's daughter, were taken to a concentration camp on 
Hitler's direct orders. 

For weeks afterward Hitler boasted that he had begun suspecting 
early in the game that Prince Philip was sending information to the 
Italian royal house. He himself had kept an eye on him, Hitler said, and 
ordered his telephone conversations tapped. By methods such as these 
it had been discovered that the Prince was passing number codes to his 
wife. Nevertheless, Hitler had continued to treat the Prince with marked 
friendliness. That had been part of his tactics, he declared, obviously 
delighted with his gifts as a detective. 

The arrest of the Prince and his wife reminded all those who were 
similarly close to Hitler that they had put themselves utterly into his 
hands. The feeling spread, unconsciously, that Hitler might be covertly 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 308 

and meanly keeping watch on anyone among his intimates and might 
deliver him up to a similar fate without giving him the slightest oppor- 
tunity to justify himself. 

Mussolini's relationship to Hitler had been for all of us, ever since 
the Duce's support during the Austrian crisis, the very symbol of amity. 
After the Italian Chief of State was overthrown and vanished without a 
trace, Hitler seemed to be inspired with a kind of Nibelungen loyalty. 
Again and again in the situation conferences he insisted that everything 
must be done to locate the missing Duce. He declared that Mussolini's 
fate was a nightmare that weighed on him day and night. 

On September 12, 1943, a conference was held in headquarters to 
which the Gauleiters of Tyrol and Carinthia were invited, along with 
me. It was settled that not only South Tyrol but also the Italian territory 
as far as Verona would be placed under the administration of Gauleiter 
Hof er of Tyrol. Large parts of Venetia, including Trieste, were assigned to 
the territory of Gauleiter Rainer of Carinthia. I was given jurisdiction 
in all questions of armaments and production for the remaining Italian 
territory and powers over and above those of the Italian authorities. Then 
came a great surprise: A few hours after the signing of these decrees 
Mussolini's liberation was announced. 

The two Gauleiters thought their newly acquired domains were lost 
again. So did I. "The Fuehrer wont expect the Duce to swallow that!" 
I said. Shortly afterward I met Hitler again and proposed that he cancel 
the new arrangement. I assumed that this was what he meant to do. To 
my surprise he fended off the suggestion. The decree would continue to 
be valid, he said. I pointed out to him that with a new Italian government 
formed under Mussolini, he could hardly infringe on Italy's sovereignty. 
Hitler reflected briefly, then said: "Present my decree to me for signature 
again, dated tomorrow. Then there will be no doubt that my order is not 
affected by the Duce's liberation." 6 

Undoubtedly Hitler had already been informed, a few days before 
this amputation of northern Italy, that the place where Mussolini was 
being held prisoner had been located. It seems a fair guess that we were 
called to headquarters so quickly precisely because of the impending 
liberation of the Duce. 

The next day Mussolini arrived in Rastenburg. Hitler embraced him, 
sincerely moved. On the anniversary of the Three-Power Pact, Hitler 
sent to the Duce, with whom he declared himself "linked in friendship," 
his "warmest wishes for the future of an Italy once more led to honorable 
freedom by Fascism." 

Two weeks before, Hitler had mutilated Italy. 



22 
Downhill 



The mounting figures for armaments production strengthened my 
position until the autumn of 1943. After we had virtually exhausted the 
industrial reserves of Germany, I tried to exploit the industrial potential 
of the other European countries we controlled. 1 Hitler was at first reluc- 
tant to make full use of the capacity of the West. And in years to come, he 
had decided, the occupied eastern territories were actually to be de- 
industrialized. For industry, he held, promoted communism and bred an 
unwanted class of intellectuals. But conditions quickly proved stronger 
than all such theories. Hitler was hardheaded enough to recognize how 
useful intact industries could be toward solving the problems of troop 
supply. 

France was the most important of the occupied industrial countries. 
Until the spring of 1943, however, its industrial production scarcely 
helped us. Sauckel's forcible recruiting of labor had done more damage 
there than its results warranted. For in order to escape forced labor, the 
French workers fled their factories, quite a few of which were producing 
for our armaments needs. In May 1943, I remonstrated to Sauckel about 
this. That July at a conference in Paris I proposed that at least the fac- 
tories in France that were working for us be immune from Sauckel's 
levies.* 

* Office Journal, July 23, 1943: "The minister proposed to improve the situation 
by designating protected factories. These would be guaranteed against levying of 
workers and would thus be made more attractive to French labor." 

( 309 ) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 3IO 

My associates and I intended to have the factories in France partic- 
ularly, but also in Belgium and Holland, produce large quantities of 
goods for the German civilian population, such as clothing, shoes, textiles, 
and furniture, in order to free similar factories in Germany for armaments. 
As soon as I was charged with all of German production at the beginning 
of September, I invited the French Minister of Production to Berlin. 
Minister Bichelonne, a professor at the Sorbonne, was reputed to be a 
capable and energetic man. 

After some bickering with the Foreign Office, I ensured that Biche- 
lonne would be treated as a state visitor. To win that point I had to appeal 
to Hitler, explaining to him that Bichelonne was not going to "come up 
the back stairs" to see me. As a result, the French Production Minister was 
quartered in the Berlin government guest house. 

Five days before Bichelonne arrived I cleared the idea with Hitler 
that we would set up a production planning council on a pan-European 
basis, with France as an equal partner along with the other nations. The 
assumption was, of course, that Germany would retain the decisive voice 
in this planning. 2 

On September 17, 1943, 1 received Bichelonne, and before very long 
a distinctly personal relationship sprang up between us. We were both 
young, we believed the future was on our side, and both of us therefore 
promised ourselves that someday we would avoid the mistakes of the First 
World War generation that was presently governing. I was even prepared 
to prevent what Hitler had in mind in the way of carving up France, all 
the more so since in a Europe integrated economically it did not matter 
where the frontiers ran. Such were the Utopian thoughts in which Biche- 
lonne and I lost ourselves for a while at that time— a token of the world 
of illusions and dreams in which we were moving. 

On the last day of the negotiations Bichelonne asked to have a private 
talk with me. At the instigation of Sauckel, he began, Premier Laval had 
forbidden him to discuss the question of the transportation of workers 
from France to Germany. 8 Would I nevertheless be willing to deal with 
the question? I said I would. Bichelonne explained his concern, and I fi- 
nally asked him whether a measure protecting French industrial plants from 
deportations would help him. If that is possible, then all my problems 
are solved, including those relating to the program we have just agreed 
on," Bichelonne said with relief. "But then the transfer of labor from 
France to Germany will virtually cease. I must tell you that in all honesty." 

I was fully aware of that, but this seemed the only way I could har- 
ness French industrial production to our purposes. Both of us had done 
something unusual. Bichelonne had disobeyed an instruction from Laval, 
and I had disavowed Sauckel. Both of us, basically without the backing 
of our superiors, had come to a far-reaching agreement.* 

* Sauckel pointed this out at the Central Planning meeting, March 1, 1944: "It 
is certainly difficult for me as a German to be confronted with a situation which all 



3ii ) Downhill 

Our production plan would offer benefits to both countries. I would 
gain armaments capacity, while the French appreciated the chance to re- 
sume peacetime production in the midst of war. In collaboration with the 
military commander in France, restricted factories would be established 
throughout the country. Placards posted in these factories would promise 
immunity from SauckeFs levies to all the workers employed in them. I per- 
sonally would stand behind this pledge, since the placards would bear my 
signature in facsimile. But French basic industry also had to be strength- 
ened, transportation guaranteed, food production assured— so that ulti- 
mately almost every important productive unit— in the end a total of ten 
thousand— would be shielded from Sauckel. 

Bichelonne and I spent the weekend at the country house of my 
friend Arno Breker. On Monday, I informed Sauckel's associates of the 
new arrangements. I called upon them to direct their efforts from then 
on to inducing workers to go back to French factories. Their numbers, I 
pledged, would be reckoned in on the quota of "assignments to German 
armaments production. ,,4 

Ten days later I was at the Fuehrer's headquarters to beat Sauckel to 
the punch in reporting to Hitler. And in fact Hitler proved content; he 
approved my arrangements and was even ready to take into account pos- 
sible production losses because of riots or strikes. 5 

In this way SauckeFs operations in France virtually came to an end. 
Instead of the previous monthly quota of fifty thousand, before long only 
five thousand workers a month were being taken to Germany.* A few 
months later (on March 1, 1944), Sauckel reported angrily: "I hear from 
my offices in France that everything is finished there. 'We might as well 
close down/ they tell me. It's the same story in every prefecture: Minister 
Bichelonne has made an agreement with Minister Speer. Laval has the 
nerve to say: 1 won t give you any more men for Germany/ " 

A short while later I proceeded to apply the same principle to Hol- 
land, Belgium, and Italy. 

On August 20, 1943, Heinrich Himmler had been appointed Minister 
of the Interior of the Reich. Until then, to be sure, he had been Reichs- 
fuhrer of the all-embracing SS, which was spoken of as a "state within 
the state." But in his capacity as chief of the police he had been, strangely, 
a subordinate of Minister of the Interior Frick. 

The power of the Gauleiters, constantly furthered by Bormann, had 



too plainly tells the French industries in France they have been placed under protec- 
tion simply to keep them out of the grasp of Sauckel." 

* See Nuremberg Document RF 22. On June 27, 1943, Sauckel wrote to Hitler: 
"Therefore I ask you, mein Ftihrer, to accept my proposal that another half a million 
French men and women be imported into the Reich until the end of the war." 
According to a notation by his assistant, Dr. Strothfang, dated July 28, 1943, Hitler 
had already agreed to this measure. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( Q12, 

led to a splintering of sovereignty in the Reich. There were two categories 
of Gauleiters. The old ones, those who had held their positions before 
1933, were simply incompetent to run an administrative apparatus. Along- 
side these men there rose, in the course of the years, a new class of Gau- 
leiters of Bormann s school. They were young administrative officials, usu- 
ally with legal training, whose one thought was to strengthen the influence 
of the party within the state. 

It was characteristic of Hitler's double-track way of running things 
that the Gauleiters in their capacity of party functionaries were under 
Bormann, while in their capacity as Reich Commissioners for Defense 
they were under the Minister of the Interior. Under the feeble Frick this 
double allegiance involved no danger to Bormann. Analysts of the political 
scene suspected, however, that with Himmler as Minister of the Interior, 
Bormann had acquired a serious counterpoise. 

I too saw it this way and was looking forward hopefully to Himmler s 
reign. Above all I counted on his checking the progressive fragmentation 
of the government executive power. And, in fact, Himmler promptly gave 
me his promise that on administrative matters of the Reich government 
he would call the willful Gauleiters to account. 6 

On October 6, 1943, 1 addressed the Reichsleiters and the Gauleiters 
of the party. The reaction to my speech signaled a turning point. My 
purpose was to open the eyes of the political leadership to the true state 
of affairs, to dispel their illusion that a great rocket would soon be ready 
for use, and to make it clear that the enemy was calling all the turns. For 
us to regain the initiative, the economic structure of Germany, in part still 
on a peacetime basis, must be shaken up, I declared. Of the six million 
persons employed in our consumer goods industries, one and a half million 
must be transferred to armaments production. From now on consumer 
goods would be manufactured in France. I admitted that this would place 
France in a favorable starting position for the postwar era. "But my 
view is," I declared to my audience of top party executives who sat there 
as if petrified, "that if we want to win the war we are the ones who will 
primarily have to make the sacrifices." 

I challenged the Gauleiters even more bluntly when I continued: 

You will please take note of this: The manner in which the various 
districts [Gaue] have hitherto obstructed the shutdown of consumer goods 
production can and will no longer be tolerated. Henceforth, if the districts 
do not respond to my requests within two weeks I shall myself order the shut- 
downs. And I can assure you that I am prepared to apply the authority of 
the Reich government at any cost! I have spoken with Reichsfuhrer-SS 
Himmler, and from now on I shall deal firmly with the districts that do not 
carry out these measures. 



313 ) Downhill 

The Gauleiters were less disturbed by the comprehensiveness of my 
program than by these two last sentences. I had barely finished my speech 
when several of them came rushing up to me. Led by one of the oldest 
among them, Joseph Biirkel, in loud voices and with waving arms they 
charged that I had threatened them with concentration camp. In order to 
correct that misapprehension, I asked Bormann if I could once more 
take the floor. But Bormann waved me aside. With hypocritical friendli- 
ness he said this was not necessary at all, for there were really no misun- 
derstandings. 

The evening after this meeting many of the Gauleiters drank so 
heavily that they needed help to get to the special train taking them to the 
Fuehrer s headquarters that night. Next morning I asked Hitler to say a 
few words about temperance to his political associates; but as always he 
spared the feelings of his comrades in arms of the early days. On the other 
hand, Bormann informed Hitler about my quarrel with the Gauleiters.* 
Hitler gave me to understand that all the Gauleiters were furious, without 
telling me any of the specific reasons. Bormann, it soon became plain, had 
at last found a way to undermine my standing with Hitler. He went on 
chipping away incessantly, and for the first time with some success. I 
myself had given him the means. From now on I could no longer count on 
Hitler's support as a matter of course. 

I also soon found out what Himmler's promise to enforce my di- 
rectives was worth. I had documents on serious disputes with Gauleiters 
sent to him, but I did not hear anything about them for weeks. Finally, 
Himmler' s state secretary, Wilhelm Stuckart, informed me with some em- 
barrassment that the Minister of the Interior had sent the documents 
directly to Bormann, whose reply had only now arrived. All the cases had 
been checked over by the Gauleiters, Stuckart said. As might have been 
expected, it had turned out that my orders were invalid and the Gauleiters 
were entirely justified in refusing to follow them. Himmler, Stuckart said, 
had accepted this report. So much for my hope of strengthening the gov- 
ernment's as against the party's authority. Nothing came of the Speer- 
Himmler coalition either. 

A few months passed before I found out why all these plans were 
doomed to failure. As I heard from Gauleiter Hanke of Lower Silesia, 
Himmler had actually tried to strike a blow against the sovereignty of 
some Gauleiters. He sent them orders through his SS commanders in their 
districts, a clear affront to their power. But he quickly learned that the 
Gauleiters had all the backing they needed in Bormann's party head- 
quarters. Within a few days Bormann had Hitler prohibit any such steps 
by Himmler. Hitler might have contempt for his Gauleiters, but at crucial 
moments he always remained loyal to these comrades of his early days of 

* I did not learn the particulars from Gauleiter Kaufmann until May 1944. Then, 
I immediately requested a meeting with Hitler. For further details, see Chapter 33. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 314 

struggle. Even Himmler and the SS could do nothing against this senti- 
mental cronyism. 

Worsted in this one inept maneuver, the SS leader completely ac- 
knowledged the independence of the Gauleiters. The projected meeting of 
"Reich Defense Commissioners" was never called, and Himmler contented 
himself with making his power felt among the politically less influential 
mayors and governors. Bormann and Himmler, who were on a first-name 
basis anyhow, soon became good friends again. My speech had brought 
to light the strata of interest-groups, but in revealing these power-relation- 
ships I had endangered myself. 

Within a few months I could chalk up a third failure in my efforts to 
activate the power and potentialities of the regime. Faced with a dilemma, 
I tried to escape it by taking the offensive. Only five days after my speech 
I had Hitler appoint me chief of future planning for all the cities damaged 
by bombing. Thus I was invested with full powers in a field which was 
much closer to the hearts of my opponents, including Bormann himself, 
than many of the problems concerned with the war. Some of them were 
already thinking of this reconstruction of the cities as their foremost future 
task. Hitler s decree reminded them that I would be standing over them in 
this. 

I wanted this assignment not only as a counter in the power struggle. 
There was another threat, one springing from the quality of the Gauleiters, 
which I felt had to be headed off. For they saw the devastation of the 
cities as an opportunity to tear down historic buildings which to them had 
little meaning. Instances of this tendency of theirs were all too common. 
One day, for example, I was sitting on a roof terrace with the Gauleiter 
of Essen looking out over the ruins after a heavy air raid. He commented 
casually that now the Cathedral of Essen could be torn down entirely, 
since the bombing had damaged it anyhow and it was only a hindrance 
to modernization of the city. The Mayor of Mannheim appealed to me for 
help to prevent the demolition of the burned-out Mannheim Castle and 
the National Theater. From Stuttgart, I heard that the burned palace 
there was also to be torn down at the orders of the local Gauleiter.* 

* Hitler found out about such plans too late. Besides, the Gauleiters were able 
to make it appear that the buildings had been on the point of collapse. Eight months 
later, on June 26, 1944, I protested to Bormann: "In various cities efforts are under 
way to tear down buildings of historical and artistic merit that have been damaged 
in the raids. The argument offered to justify these measures is that the buildings are 
either about to collapse or cannot be restored. It is also contended that demolition 
will provide a welcome opportunity for urban renewal. I would be very grateful if 
you would send a memorandum to all the Gauleiters pointing out that historical 
monuments, even in ruins, must be preserved at all costs. I must ask you also to 
inform the Gauleiters that such monuments cannot be torn down until the Fuehrer 
himself has definitely decided on reconstruction plans for the cities and thus also for 



315 ) Downhill 

The reasoning in all these cases was the same: Away with castles and 
churches; after the war we'll build our own monuments! In part this im- 
pulse sprang from the feeling of inferiority toward the past that the party 
bigwigs had. But there was another element in this feeling, as one of the 
Gauleiters explained when he was justifying his demolition order to me: 
Castles and churches of the past were citadels of reaction that stood in 
the way of our revolution. Remarks of this sort revealed a fanaticism that 
belonged to the early days of the party, but that had gradually been lost in 
the compromises and arrangements of a party in power. 

I myself placed such importance on the preservation of the historical 
fabric of the German cities and on a sane policy of reconstruction that 
even at the climax and turning point of the war, in November and Decem- 
ber 1943, I addressed a letter to all Gauleiters in which I recast most of 
my prewar philosophy: no more pretentious artistic notions, but economy- 
mindedness; broad-scale transportation planning to save the cities from 
traffic congestion; mass production of housing, cleaning up the old quar- 
ters of the cities, and establishing businesses in the city centers. 7 There 
was no longer any talk of monumental buildings. My enthusiasm for them 
had faded, and so in all probability had Hitler's, for he let me describe this 
new planning concept to him without the least protest. 

Early in November 1943, Soviet troops were approaching Nikopol, the 
center of matiganese mining. At this time there occurred a curious inci- 
dent in which Hitler behaved much as Goering had when he ordered his 
generals to tell a deliberate He. 

Chief of Staff Zeitzler phoned to tell me that he had just had a violent 
disagreement with Hitler. He himself was highly agitated. Hitler had in- 
sisted, he said, that all available divisions be massed for the defense of 
Nikopol. Without manganese, Hitler had declared excitedly, the war would 
be lost in no time. Three months later Speer would have to halt arma- 
ments production, for he has no reserve stocks of manganese. 8 Zeitzler 
begged me to help him. Instead of bringing in new troops, he said, the 
time had come to begin the retreat. This was our only chance to avert 
another Stalingrad. 

After hearing this, I at once sat down with Rochling and Rohland, 
our steel industry experts, to clarify our situation in regard to manganese. 
Manganese was, of course, one of the principal constituents of high- 
strength steels. But it was equally clear after Zeitzlers telephone call that 
one way or another the manganese mines in southern Russia were lost 
to us. What I learned at my conferences was surprisingly favorable. On 



these buildings." Despite the limited means, materials, and workmen available, I also 
ordered that many damaged monuments be patched up sufficiently to prevent further 
dilapidation. I tried to put this plan into effect in northern Italy and in France by 
giving similar instructions to the Todt Organization. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 316 

November 11, I informed Zeitzler and Hitler by teletype: "Manganese 
stocks sufficient for eleven to twelve months available in the Reich even 
if present procedures are maintained. The Reich Steel Association guar- 
antees that in case Nikopol is lost introduction of other metals will enable 
us to stretch the manganese stocks without additional strain on other alloy 
materials for eighteen months." 9 I could moreover state that even the loss 
of neighboring Krivoi Rog— for the holding of which Hitler wanted to 
wage a great defensive battle—would not seriously affect the continued 
flow of German steel production. 

When I arrived at the Fuehrer's headquarters two days later, Hitler 
snarled at me in a tone he had never used toward me before: "What was 
the idea of your giving the Chief of Staff your memorandum on the man- 
ganese situation?" 

I had expected to find him well pleased with me, and managed only 
to reply, stunned: "But, mein Fuhrer, it's good news after all!" 

Hitler did not accept that. "You are not to give the Chief of Staff any 
memoranda at all! If you have some information, kindly send it to me. 
You've put me in an intolerable situation. I have just given orders for all 
available forces to be concentrated for the defense of Nikopol. At last I 
have a reason to force the army group to fight! And then Zeitzler comes 
along with your memo. It makes me out a liar! If Nikopol is lost now, it's 
your fault. I forbid you once and for all"— his voice rose to a scream at the 
end— "to address any memos to anybody but myself. Do you understand 
that? I forbid it!" 

Nevertheless, my memorandum had done its work; for soon after- 
ward Hitler stopped insisting on a battle for the manganese mines. But 
since the Soviet pressure in this area ceased at the same time, Nikopol was 
not lost until February 18, 1944. 

In a second memorandum I gave to Hitler that day, I had drawn up 
an inventory of our stocks of all alloy metals. By the single sentence, "im- 
ports from the Balkans, Turkey, Nikopol, Finland, and northern Norway 
have not been considered," I alluded to the possibility that these areas 
might well be lost to us. The following table sums up the results:* 

Manganese Nickel Chromium Wolframite Molybdenum Silicon 

Home stocks 140,000 1 6,000 1 21,000 1 1,330 1 425 1 17,900 1 

Imports 8,100 1 190 1 15.5 1 4,200 1 

Consumption 15,500 1 750 1 3*75! t 160 1 69.5 1 7,000 1 

Months reserve 19 10 5.6 10.6 7.8 6.4 

From this table I drew the following conclusion: 

Hence, the element in shortest supply is chromium. This is especially 
grave since chromium is indispensable to a highly developed armaments 

* Figures given in metric tons. 



317 ) Downhill 

industry. Should supplies from Turkey be cut off, the stockpile of chromium 
is sufficient only for 5.6 months. The manufacture of planes, tanks, motor 
vehicles, tank shells, U-boats, and almost the entire gamut of artillery would 
have to cease from one to three months after this deadline, since by then the 
reserves in the distribution channels would be used up. 10 

That meant no more or less than that the war would be over approxi- 
mately ten months after the loss of the Balkans. Hitler listened to my re- 
port, whose import was that it would not be Nikopol but the Balkans that 
would determine the outcome of the war, in total silence. Then he turned 
away, out of sorts. He addressed my associate Saur, to discuss new tank 
programs with him. 

Until the summer of 1943, Hitler used to telephone me at the begin- 
ning of every month to ask for the latest production figures, which he then 
entered on a prepared sheet. I gave him tie figures in the customary order, 
and Hitler usually received them with exclamations such as: "Very good! 
Why, that's wonderful! Really a hundred and ten Tigers? That's more than 
you promised. . . . And how many Tigers do you think you'll manage next 
month? Every tank is important now. . . . " He generally concluded these 
conversations with a brief reference to the situation: "We've taken Khar- 
kov today. It's going well. Well then, nice to talk to you. My regards 
to your wife. Is she still at Obersalzberg? Well then, my regards again." 

When I thanked him and added the salutation, "Heil, mein Fuhrer!" 
he sometimes replied, "Heil, Speer." This greeting was a sign of favor 
which he only rarely vouchsafed to Goering, Goebbels, and a few other 
intimates; underlying it was a note of faint irony at the mandatory, "Heil, 
mein Fuhrer." At such moments I felt as if a medal had been conferred on 
me. I did not notice the element of condescension in this familiarity. Al- 
though the fascination of the early days and the excitement of being on 
an intimate footing with Hitler had long since passed, although I no longer 
enjoyed the unique special position of Hitler's architect, and although I 
had become one of many in the apparatus of government, a word from 
Hitler had lost none of its magical force. To be precise, all the intrigues 
and struggles for power were directed toward eliciting such a word, or 
what it stood for. The position of each and every one of us was dependent 
on his attitude. 

The telephone calls gradually ceased. It is difficult to say just when, 
but from the autumn of 1943 on > at an y rate > Hitler fell into the habit of 
calling Saur to ask for the monthly reports. 11 I did not oppose this, since 
I recognized Hitler's right to take away what he had given. But since Bor- 
mann had particularly good relations with Saur as well as Dorsch— both 
men were old party members— I gradually began to feel insecure in my 
own Ministry. 

At first I tried to consolidate my position "by assigning a representa- 
tive from industry as a deputy to each of my ten department heads. 12 But 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 318 

Dorsch and Saur succeeded in frustrating my intention in their own de- 
partments. Since it became ever more apparent that a faction was forming 
in the Ministry under the leadership of Dorsch, on December 21, 1943, I 
initiated a kind of "coup d etat," appointing two old, reliable associates 
from my days as Hitler s chief architect as chiefs of the Personnel and 
Organization Section, 13 and placed the previously independent Todt Or- 
ganization under their direction. 

The next day I escaped from the heavy burdens of the year 1943, 
with its multitudinous personal disappointments and intrigues, by seek- 
ing out the remotest and loneliest corner of the world within our sphere 
of power: northern Lapland. In 1941 and 1942, Hitler had refused to let 
me travel to Norway, Finland, and Russia because he considered such 
a journey too dangerous and me too indispensable. But this time he gave 
his approval with no more ado. 

We started at dawn in my new plane, a four-motored Focke-Wulf 
Condor. It had unusually long range because of its built-in reserve 
tanks. 14 Siegfried Borries, the violinist, and an amateur magician who 
became famous after the war under the name of Kalanag, accompanied 
us. My idea was that instead of making speeches, we would provide some 
Christmas entertainment for the soldiers and Todt Organization workers 
in the north. Flying low, we looked down at Finland's chains of lakes, 
which my wife and I had longed to explore with faltboat and tent. Early 
in the afternoon, in the last glimmers of dusk in this northern region, we 
landed near Rovaniemi on a primitive snow-covered runway marked out 
by kerosene lamps. 

The very next day we drove two hundred and seventy-five miles north 
in an open car until we reached the small Arctic port of Petsamo. The 
landscape had a certain high-alpine monotony, but the changes of light 
through all the intervening shades from yellow to red, produced by the 
sun moving below the horizon, had a fantastic beauty. 

In Petsamo we held several Christmas parties for workers, soldiers 
and officers, and even more on the following evenings in the other bar- 
racks. The following night we slept in the personal blockhouse of the 
commanding general of the Arctic front. From here we visited advanced 
bases on Fisher Peninsula, our northernmost and the most inhospitable 
sector of the front, only fifty miles from Murmansk. It was an area of 
depressing solitude. A sallow, greenish light slanted down through a veil 
of fog and snow upon a treeless, deathly rigid landscape. Accompanied 
by General Hengl, we slowly worked our way on skis to the advance 
strongpoints. At one of these positions a unit demonstrated to me the 
effect of one of our 15 centimeter infantry howitzers on a Soviet dugout. 
It was the first "test-firing" with live ammunition I had really witnessed. 
For when one of the heavy batteries at Cape Griz-Nez was demonstrated 
to me, the commander said his target was Dover but then explained that 



319 ) Downhill 

in reality he had ordered his men to fire into the water. Here, on the 
other hand, the gunners scored a direct hit and the wooden beams of the 
Russian dugout flew into the air. Immediately afterward a lance cor- 
poral right beside me collapsed without a sound. A Soviet sharpshooter 
had hit him in the head through the observation slit. Oddly enough, this 
was the first time I had been confronted with the reality of the war. I 
had been acquainted with our infantry howitzers only as technical items 
to be demonstrated on a shooting range; now I suddenly saw how this 
instrument, which I had regarded purely theoretically, was used to 
destroy human beings. 

Dining this inspection tour both our soldiers and officers complained 
about our lack of light infantry weapons. They particularly missed an 
effective submachine gun. The soldiers made do with captured Soviet 
weapons of this type. 

Hitler was directly responsible for this situation. The former First 
World War infantryman still clung to his familiar carbine. In the sum- 
mer of 1942 he decided against a submachine gun that had already been 
developed and ruled that the rifle better served the ends of the infantry. 
One lingering effect of his own experience in the trenches was, as I now 
saw in practice, that he promoted the heavy weapons and tanks he had 
then admired, to the neglect of infantry weapons. 

Immediately after my return I tried to correct this unbalance. At 
the beginning of January our infantry program was supported with 
specific requests from the army General Staff and the Commander in 
Chief of the reserve army. But Hitler, as his own expert on matters of 
armaments, waited six months before approving our proposals, only 
afterward to hector us for any failure to meet our quotas on the dead- 
lines. Within three-quarters of a year we achieved significant increases 
in this important area. In the case of the submachine gun we actually 
expanded production twenty-fold— though, to be sure, hardly any of these 
guns had been produced previously. 15 We could have achieved these 
increases two years earlier without being compelled to use any f acilities 
involved in the production of heavy weapons. 

The next day, I had a look at the nickel plant of Kolosjokki, our 
sole source of nickel and the real destination of this Christmas trip of 
mine. Its yards were filled with ore that had not been shipped out be- 
cause our transport facilities were being employed on building a bomb- 
proof power plant. I assigned the power plant a lower priority rating and 
the supply of nickel began to move to our factories at a faster pace. 

In a clearing in the heart of the primeval forest, some distance from 
Lake Inari, Lapp and German woodcutters had gathered around an art- 
fully built wood fire, source of both warmth and illumination, while Sieg- 
fried Borries began the evening with the famous chaconne from Bach's 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 32O 

D-minor Partita. Afterward we took a nocturnal ski tour lasting for 
several hours to one of the Lapp encampments. Our expected idyllic 
night in a tent at twenty-two degrees below zero Fahrenheit came to 
naught, however; for the wind turned and filled our shelter halves with 
smoke. I fled outside and at three o'clock in the morning bedded down 
in my reindeer skin sleeping bag. The next morning I felt a darting pain 
in my knee. 

A few days later I was back at Hitler's headquarters. At Bormann's 
instigation he had called a major conference at which, in the presence 
of the chief ministers, the labor program for 1944 was to be drafted and 
Sauckel was to lodge his complaints against me. On the day before I 
proposed to Hitler that we hold a prior meeting under the chairmanship 
of Lammers to discuss those differences which were better thrashed out 
beforehand. At this, Hitler became distinctly aggressive. He said in an icy 
voice that he would not put up with such attempts to influence the par- 
ticipants in the conference. He did not want to hear any preconceived 
opinions; he wanted to make the decisions himself. 

After this reprimand I went to Himmler, accompanied by my tech- 
nical advisers. Field Marshal Keitel was also present at my request. 16 I 
wanted to agree on joint tactics with these men at least, in order to 
prevent Sauckel from resuming his deportations from the occupied 
western areas. For Keitel, as superior to all the military commanders, and 
Himmler, who was responsible for the policing of the occupied territories, 
feared that such a step would bring about a rise in partisan activities. 
Both Himmler and Keitel, we agreed, were to declare at the conference 
that they did not have the necessary personnel for any new roundup of 
labor by Sauckel and that therefore public order would be imperiled. 
By this shift I hoped to achieve my aim of finally stopping the deporta- 
tions. I would then push through intensified employment of the German 
reserves, especially German women. 

But apparently Bormann had prepared Hitler on the problems in- 
volved just as I had Himmler and Keitel. Even as Hitler greeted us he 
showed, by his coldness and rudeness toward all the participants, that 
he was out of sorts. Seeing such omens, anyone who knew Hitler would 
be very careful about raising difficult questions. I, too, on such a day, 
would have left all my most important concerns in my briefcase and 
would have presented him only with minor problems. But the subject 
of the conference could no longer be dodged. Irritably, Hitler cut me off: 
"Herr Speer, I will not have you trying once again to force your ideas 
on a conference. I am chairing this meeting and I shall decide at the end 
what is to be done. Not you! Kindly remember that!" 

No one ever opposed Hitler in these angry, ill-natured moods. My 
allies Keitel and Himmler no longer dreamed of saying their pieces, as 
agreed on. On the contrary, they stoutly assured Hitler that they would 



321 ) Downhill 

do all in their power to support Sauckel's program. Hitler began to ask 
the various ministers present about their need for workers in 1944. He 
carefully wrote down all these figures, added up the sum himself, and 
turned to Sauckel, 17 "Can you, Party Comrade Sauckel, obtain four mil- 
lion workers this year? Yes or no." 

Sauckel puffed out his chest. "Of course, mein Fiihrer. I give you 
my word on that. But to fill the quota I'll have to have a free hand again 
in the occupied territories." 

I made a few objections to the effect that I thought the majority 
of these millions could be mobilized in Germany itself. Hitler cut me 
off sharply: "Are you responsible to me for the labor force or is Party 
Comrade Sauckel?" 

In a tone that excluded all contradiction, Hitler now ordered Keitel 
and Himmler to instruct their organizations to push the program of ob- 
taining workers. Keitel, as always, merely said: "Jawohl, mein Fiihrer!" 
And Himmler remained mute. The battle seemed already lost. In order 
to save something out of it, I asked Sauckel whether in spite of his re- 
cruitments he could also guarantee the labor supply for the restricted 
factories. Boastfully, he replied that this would not cause any problems. 
I then attempted to settle the priorities and to extract some kind of 
pledge from Sauckel to transport workers to Germany only after the 
supply for the restricted factories had been guaranteed. Sauckel also 
consented to this with a wave of his hand. But Hitler promptly inter- 
vened: "What more do you want, Herr Speer? Isn't it enough if Party 
Comrade Sauckel assures you that? Your mind should be at ease about 
French industry." 

Further discussion would only have strengthened Sauckel's position. 
The conference was over; Hitler became more cordial again and ex- 
changed a few friendly words, even with me. But that was the end of it. 
Nevertheless, Sauckel's deportations never got started. That had little 
to do with my efforts to block him through my French offices and with 
the collusion of the army authorities. 18 Loss of authority in the occupied 
areas, the spreading rule of the maquis, and the growing reluctance of 
the German occupation administrators to increase their difficulties, pre- 
vented the execution of all these plans. 

The outcome of the conference at the Fuehrer's headquarters had 
consequences only for me personally. From Hitler's treatment of me, it 
was clear to everyone that I was in disfavor. The victor in the struggle 
between Sauckel and me had been Bormann. From now on we had to 
deal with, at first covert, but soon with more and more overt, attacks 
upon my aides from industry. More and more frequently I had to defend 
them at the party secretariat against suspicions or even intervene with 
the secret police to protect them. 19 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 322 

Even the last scintillating assembly of the prominent leaders of the 
Reich could scarcely distract me from my cares. That was the gala cele- 
bration of Goering's birthday on January 12, 1944, which he held at 
Karinhall. We all came with expensive presents, such as Goering ex- 
pected: cigars from Holland, gold bars from the Balkans, valuable paint- 
ings and sculptures. Goering had let me know that he would like to have 
a marble bust of Hitler, more than life size, by Breker. The overladen 
gift table had been set up in the big library. Goering displayed it to his 
guests and spread out on it the building plans his architect had prepared 
for his birthday. Goering's palace-like residence was to be more than 
doubled in size. 

At the magnificently set table in the luxurious dining room flunkies 
in white livery served a somewhat austere meal, in keeping with the 
conditions of the time. Funk, as he did every year, delivered the birth- 
day speech at the banquet. He lauded Goering's abilities, qualities, and 
dignities and offered the toast to him as "one of the greatest Germans." 
Funk's extravagant words contrasted grotesquely with the actual situa- 
tion. The whole thing was a ghostly celebration taking place against a 
background of collapse and ruin. 

After the meal the guests scattered through the spacious rooms of 
Karinhall. Milch and I had some words about where the money for this 
ostentation was probably coming from. Milch said that recently Goering's 
old friend Loerzer, the famous fighter pilot of the First World War, had 
sent him a carload of stuff from the Italian black market: women's stock- 
ings, soap, and other rare items. Loerzer had informed Milch that he 
could have these things sold on the black market. There had even been 
a price list with the shipment, probably with the intention of keeping 
black market prices uniform throughout Germany, and the considerable 
profit that would fall to Milch had already been computed. Instead, 
Milch had the goods from the car distributed among the employees of 
his Ministry. Soon afterward I heard that many other carloads had been 
sold for Goering's benefit. And a while after that the superintendent of 
the Reich Air Ministry, Plagemann, who had to carry out these deals 
for Goering, was removed from Milch's control and made a direct sub- 
ordinate of Goering. 

I had had my personal experiences with Goering's birthdays. Ever 
since I had been entitled to six thousand marks annually as a member 
of the Prussian Council of State, I had also been receiving every year, 
just before Goering's birthday, a letter informing me that a considerable 
portion of my fee would be withheld for the Council of State's birthday 
gift to Goering. I was not even asked for this contribution. When I men- 
tioned this to Milch he told me that a similar procedure was followed 
with the Air Ministry's general fund. On every birthday a large sum 



323 ) Downhill 

from this fund was diverted to Goering's account, whereupon the Reich 
Marshal himself decided what painting was to be bought with this sum. 

Yet we knew that such sources could cover only a small part of 
Goering's enormous expenditures. We did not know what men in indus- 
try provided the subsidies; but Milch and I now and again had occasion 
to find out that such sources existed— when Goering telephoned us be- 
cause some man in our organizations had treated one of his patrons a 
bit roughly. 

My recent experiences and encounters in Lapland had provided the 
greatest imaginable contrast to the hothouse atmosphere of this corrupt 
bogus world. Evidently, too, I was more depressed by the uncertainty 
of my relationship with Hitler than I cared to admit to myself. The 
nearly two years of continuous tension had been taking their toll. Physi- 
cally, I was nearly worn out at the age of thirty-eight. The pain in my 
knee hardly ever left me. I had no reserves of strength. Or were all these 
symptoms merely an escape? 

On January 18, 1944, 1 was taken to a hospital. 



PART 



THREE 



2 3 

Illness 



Dr. gebhardt, ss group leader and well known as a knee specialist 
in the European world of sports,* ran the Red Cross's Hohenlychen Hos- 
pital. It was situated on a lakeside in wooded country about sixty miles 
north of Berlin. Without knowing it, I had put myself into the hands of 
a doctor who was one of Heinrich Himmler's very few intimate friends. 
For more than two months I lived in a simply furnished sickroom in the 
private section of the hospital. My secretaries were quartered in other 
rooms in the building, and a direct telephone line to my Ministry was set 
up, for I wanted to keep on working. 

Sickness on the part of a minister of the Third Reich involved some 
special difficulties. Only too often Hitler had explained the elimination 
of a prominent figure in the government or the party on grounds of ill 
health. People in political circles therefore pricked up their ears if any 
of Hitlers close associates was reported "sick." Since, however, I was 
really sick, it seemed advisable to remain as active as possible. More- 
over, I could not let go on my apparatus, for like Hitler I had no suitable 
deputy at my disposal. Though friends and associates did their best to 

* Gebhardt had also been consulted about a knee injury by Leopold III of Bel- 
gium and by the Belgian industrialist Danny Heinemann. During the Nuremberg 
Trial, I learned that Gebhardt had performed experiments on prisoners in concentra- 
tion camps. 

( 3*7 ) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 328 

give me the opportunity to rest, the conferences, telephone calls, and 
dictation conducted from my bed often did not stop before midnight. 

My absence unleashed certain elements, as the following incident 
will illustrate. Almost as soon as I arrived at the hospital, my newly 
appointed personnel chief, Erwin Bohr, telephoned me, quite excited. 
There was a locked filing case in his office, he said. Dorsch had ordered 
this case transported at once to the Todt Organization headquarters. I 
instantly countermanded this, saying that it was to stay where it was. A 
few days later representatives of the Berlin Gauleiter s headquarters 
appeared, accompanied by several moving men. They had orders, Bohr 
informed me, to take the filing case with them, for it was party property 
along with its contents. Bohr no longer knew what to do. I managed to 
postpone this action by telephoning one of Goebbels's closest associates, 
Naumann. The filing case was sealed by the party officials— but the seal 
was placed only on its door. I then had it opened by unscrewing the 
back. The next day Bohr came to the hospital with a bundle of photo- 
copied documents. They contained dossiers on a number of my time- 
honored assistants— adverse reports almost without exception. Most of 
the men were charged with attitudes hostile to the party; in some cases 
it was recommended that they be watched by the Gestapo. I also dis- 
covered that the party had a liaison man in my Ministry: Xaver Dorsch. 
The fact surprised me less than the person. 

Since the autumn I had been trying to have one of the officials in 
my Ministry promoted. But the clique which had recently taken shape 
in the Ministry did not like him. My then personnel chief had resorted 
to all sorts of evasions, until I finally forced him to nominate my man 
for promotion. Shortly before my illness I had received a sharp, un- 
friendly rejection from Bormann. Now we found a draft of that sharp 
note among the documents in this secret file, composed, as it turned 
out, by Dorsch and Personnel Chief Haasemann (whom I had replaced 
by Bohr). Bormann s text followed it word for word.* 

From my sickbed I telephoned Goebbels. As Gauleiter of Berlin he 
was head of all the party representatives in the Berlin ministries. Goeb- 



* According to the "Report to the Fuehrer," No. 5, January 29, 1944, Dorsch 
was the "Special Department Supervisor of the League of German Officials." From 
the letter to the party secretariat: "Birkenholz . . . displayed uncomradely behavior, 
arrogance, etc., conduct that cannot be condoned in a high official who ought to 
stand solidly behind the National Socialist State. In character also he seems unsuitable 
for promotion to the rank of Ministerialrat. . . . For these reasons I cannot support 
the promotion. Moreover, certain internal events in this office militate against it." 
The party secretariat had the right to decide on the promotion of all ministerial 
officials. I wrote to Hitler on January 29, 1944: "The devastating report which without 
my knowledge was sent as a political evaluation to the party secretariat and to the 
Gau was jointly composed by Herr Dorsch and the former director of my personnel 



329 ) Illness 

bels agreed at once that my old assistant Gerhard Frank was the man 
for this post in my Ministry. "An impossible state of affairs! Every min- 
ister is a party member nowadays. Either we have confidence in him or 
he must go!" Goebbels said. But I could not find out who the Gestapo's 
agents in my Ministry were. 

The effort to maintain my position during my illness proved almost 
too much for me. I had to ask Bormanns state secretary, Gerhard Klop- 
fer, to instruct the party functionaries to stay within their bounds. Above 
all I asked him to look out for the industrialists working for me and to 
see that no obstacles were placed in their way. For I had no sooner 
fallen sick than the district [Gau] economic adviser of the party had 
begun making inroads into my system. I asked Funk and his assistant 
Otto Ohlendorf , whom he had borrowed from Himmler, to take a more 
affirmative attitude toward my principle of industrial self -responsibility 
and to back me against Bormanns district economic advisers. 

Sauckel, too, had already taken advantage of my absence to "make 
a general appeal to the men involved in armaments for an ultimate com- 
mitment." Faced with these effronteries from all sides, I turned to Hitler 
to tell him of my woes and ask his help. My letters— twenty-three type- 
written pages that took me four days— were a sign of the funk I was in. I 
protested against Sauckel's arrogation of power and against the thrusts of 
Bormanns district economic advisers, and I asked Hitler for a statement 
of my unconditional authority in all questions that fell within my juris- 
diction. Basically, I was asking for the very thing I had unsuccessfully 
demanded in such drastic language at the conference in Posen, to the 
indignation of the Gauleiters. I further wrote that our total production 
could be carried out rationally only if the "many offices which give direc- 
tions, criticism, and advice to the plant managements" were concentrated 
in my hands. 1 

Four days later I appealed to Hitler again, with a candor that really 
was no longer in keeping with our present relationship. I informed him 
about the camarilla in my Ministry which was undermining my program. 
I said there was treachery afoot; that a certain small clique of Todt's 
former assistants, led by Dorsch, had broken faith with me. I therefore 
considered myself forced, I wrote, to replace Dorsch by a man who had 
my confidence. 2 

This last letter, with its news that I was dismissing one of Hitlers 
favorites without asking him beforehand, was particularly imprudent. 



section, Herr Haasemann. It is thus established that behind my back these two men 
tried to block an official order of mine. They underhandedly prejudiced the political 
branches of the Gau and the party secretariat against the proposed candidate by 
writing a devastating report. In this way they betrayed me as a Minister of the 
Reich." Because of its personal nature I had this memo for the Fuehrer sent directly 
to Hitler's adjutant corps. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 33O 

For I was violating one of the rules of the regime: that personnel matters 
must be broached to Hitler at the right moment and by skillful insinua- 
tion. Instead, I had bluntly come at him with charges of disloyalty and 
questionable character in one of his men. That I also sent Bormann a copy 
of my letter was either foolish or challenging. In doing this I was running 
counter to all I knew about the nature of Hitler's intriguing entourage. 
I was probably acting out of a certain attitude of defiance, forced upon 
me by my isolated position. 

My illness had removed me too far from the true focus of power: 
Hitler. He reacted neither negatively nor positively to all my sugges- 
tions, demands, and complaints. I was addressing the empty air; he sent 
me no answer. I was no longer counted as Hitler s favorite minister and 
one of his possible successors— a few whispered words by Bormann and 
a few weeks of illness had put me out of the running. This was partly 
due to Hitler's peculiarity, often noted by everyone around him, of simply 
writing off anyone who vanished from his sight for a considerable time. 
If the person in question reappeared in his entourage after a while, the 
picture might or might not change. It disillusioned me and snapped some 
of my ties of personal feeling toward Hitler. But most of the time I was 
neither angry nor in despair over my new situation. Physically weakened 
as I was, I felt only weariness and resignation. 

In roundabout ways I finally heard that Hitler was unwilling to 
part with Dorsch, his party comrade of the twenties. During these weeks 
he therefore rather ostentatiously honored Dorsch by making time for 
confidential talks with him and thus strengthening Dorsch's position 
vis-&-vis me. Goering, Bormann, and Himmler understood how the center 
of gravity had shifted and took this occasion to destroy my position com- 
pletely. Undoubtedly each of them was working for himself, each from 
different motives, and probably each without communicating with the 
others. But any chance for getting rid of Dorsch was scuttled. 

For twenty days I lay on my back, my leg immovable in a plaster 
cast, and had plenty of time to brood over my resentment and disap- 
pointments. A few hours after I was allowed to stand again, I felt violent 
pains in my back and chest. The blood in my sputum suggested a pul- 
monary embolism. But Professor Gebhardt diagnosed muscular rheuma- 
tism and massaged my chest with bee venom (forapin), then prescribed 
sulfanilimide, quinine, and various pain killers. 3 Two days later I suf- 
fered a second violent attack. My condition seemed critical, but Gebhardt 
continued to insist on muscular rheumatism. 

At this point my wife went to Dr. Brandt, who immediately sent 
Dr. Friedrich Koch, internist at Berlin University and one of Sauerbruch's 
assistants, to Hohenlychen. Brandt, who was not only Hitler's personal 
physician but also the commissioner for public health, explicitly charged 
Professor Koch with sole responsibility for my treatment and forbade 



33i ) Illness 

Dr. Gebhardt to issue any medical orders in my case. On Brandt's instruc- 
tions Dr. Koch was assigned a room near mine and was to stay at my side 
day and night for the time being.* 

For three days my condition remained, as Koch stated in his report, 
"distinctly critical: extreme respiratory difficulty, intense blue coloration, 
considerable acceleration of the pulse, high temperatures, painful cough, 
muscular pain, and bloody sputum. The development of the symptoms 
could be interpreted only as the result of an embolism." 

The doctors prepared my wife for the worst. But in contrast to this 
pessimism, I myself was feeling a remarkable euphoria. The little room 
expanded into a magnificent hall. A plain wardrobe I had been star- 
ing at for three weeks turned into a richly carved display piece, inlaid with 
rare woods. Hovering between living and dying, I had a sense of well- 
being such as I had only rarely experienced. 

When I had recovered somewhat, my friend Robert Frank told me 
about a confidential talk he had had one night with Dr. Koch. What he 
related sounded somewhat sinister: During my critical state Gebhardt 
kept recommending a small operation which in Koch's view would have 
been far too perilous. When Koch at first refused to see the need for the 
operation and then flatly forbade it, Gebhardt had clumsily backed out 
of the whole thing, alleging that he had only wanted to test his opinion. 

Frank begged me to keep the matter confidential, since Dr. Koch 
was afraid he would vanish into a concentration camp and my informant 
would certainly have trouble with the Gestapo. And in fact the story had 
to be suppressed, since I could scarcely have gone to Hitler with it. His 
reaction was predictable: In an access of rage he would have called the 
whole thing absolutely impossible, would have pressed that special button 
of his summoning Bormann, and would have ordered the arrest of these 
slanderers of Himmler. 

At the time this affair did not strike me as quite so much like a cheap 
spy novel as it may sound today. Even in party circles Himmler had a 
reputation for ruthless, icy consistency. No one dared quarrel with him 
seriously. Moreover, the opportunity was made to order: The slightest 
complication of my illness would have carried me off, so that there would 
have been no grounds for any suspicion. The episode has its place in a 
chapter on the struggles for the succession. My position was, it indicated 
plainly, still powerful, although already so imperiled that further intrigues 
could be expected. 

When we were together in Spandau prison, Funk told me the details 

* On February 11, 1944, Dr. Gebhardt tried to force Dr. Koch out of the case 
by writing to Hitler's personal physician, Brandt's rival, Dr. Morell. He invited Morell 
for a consultation as an internist. Morell could not be spared from his other duties, 
but he had the case described to him by telephone and, sight unseen, prescribed 
vitamin K injections to stop me from spitting blood. Dr. Koch rejected this suggestion 
and a few weeks later described Morell as a total incompetent. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 332 

of an incident which he had only dared hint at in 1944. Sometime in the 
autumn of 1943 the staff of Sepp Dietrich's SS army had held a drinking 
bout. Dr. Gebhardt was among the guests. Funk himself had heard about 
it through his friend and former adjutant Horst Walter, who at the time 
was Dietrich's adjutant. It seemed that Gebhardt had remarked to this 
circle of SS leaders that in Himmler s opinion Speer was dangerous; he 
would have to disappear. 

My uneasiness in this hospital was mounting, and I wanted desperately 
to be out of it, though the state of my health was still far from encourag- 
ing. Rather precipitately, on February 19, I set my people to finding a 
new place to convalesce. Gebhardt tried to dissuade me with all sorts of 
medical reasons, and even after I got up again at the beginning of March 
he tried to prevent my departure. Ten days later, however, when a nearby 
hospital was struck in the course of a heavy attack by the American Eighth 
Air Force, Gebhardt became convinced that I was the target. Overnight 
he changed his mind about my ability to be moved, and on March 17 
I was at last able to leave this oppressive place. 

Shortly before the end of the war I asked Dr. Koch what had really 
gone on at the time. But he would only tell me what I already knew, 
that he had had an angry dispute with Gebhardt over my case, in the 
course of which Gebhardt had remarked that it was Koch's business to be 
not only a physician but a "political physician." The one thing that was 
really clear, Koch said, was that Gebhardt had done his utmost to keep 
me in his hospital as long as possible. 4 

On February 23, 1944, Milch visited me in my sickroom. He informed 
me that the American Eighth and Fifteenth Air Forces were concentrating 
their bombing on the German aircraft industry, with the result that our 
aircraft production would be reduced to a third of what it had been, at 
least for the month to come. Milch brought with him a proposal in writ- 
ing: Inasmuch as the Ruhr Staff had successfully dealt with the bomb 
damage in the Ruhr area, we needed a "Fighter Aircraft Staff" which 
would pool the talents of the two ministries (Air Ministry and Ministry of 
Armaments) in order to overcome the crisis in aircraft production. 

With things as they were, it would have been prudent of me to stave 
off such proposals. But I wanted to leave nothing untried which would 
help the hard-pressed Luftwaffe and therefore consented. Both of us, 
Milch and I, fully realized that this Fighter Aircraft Staff represented the 
first step toward incorporation into my Ministry of Armaments production 
for the one branch of the services whose armaments work I had not yet 
taken over. 

From my bed I telephoned Goering, who for his part refused to enter 
into such a partnership. As he saw it, I would be interfering in his domain. 
I did not accept this veto. Instead, I telephoned Hitler, who thought the 



333 ) Illness 

idea good, but he turned cool and negative as soon as I said we had been 
thinking of Gauleiter Hanke to head the new staff. "I made a great mis- 
take when I appointed Sauckel to take charge of labor assignment/' Hitler 
answered on the telephone. "As a Gauleiter he should be in a position to 
make irrevocable decisions, and instead he is always having to negotiate 
and make compromises. Never again will I let a Gauleiter become in- 
volved in such tasks!" As he spoke Hitler had grown steadily angrier. "The 
example of Sauckel has had the effect of diminishing the authority of all 
the Gauleiters. Saur is going to take over this job!" After this Hitler abrupt- 
ly ended the conversation. For the second time in a short while he had 
overruled me on an appointment. I had also noticed how cold and un- 
friendly Hitlers voice had been throughout the latter part of our telephone 
conversation. Perhaps some other matter had put him in an ill humor. But 
since Milch also favored Saur, whose power had grown during my illness, 
I accepted Hitler's order without more ado. 

From years of experience I knew the distinctions Hitler made when 
his adjutant Schaub reminded him of the birthday or illness of one of his 
numerous associates. A curt "flowers and letter" meant a letter with a fixed 
text which was presented to him only for signature. The choice of flowers 
was left to the adjutant. It counted as an honor if Hitler added a few 
words in his own hand to the letter. If he were particularly concerned, 
however, he would have Schaub hand him the card and a pen and would 
write a few lines. Sometimes he even specified what flowers were to be 
sent. In the past I had belonged among those who were most conspicu- 
ously honored, along with movie stars and singers. Therefore, when shortly 
after the crisis of my illness I received a bowl of flowers with a standard 
typewritten note, I realized that I had been dropped to the lowest rung 
in the hierarchy, even though I had meanwhile become one of the most 
important members of his government. As a sick man I undoubtedly re- 
acted more sensitively than was necessary. For Hitler also telephoned me 
two or three times to ask about my health. But he blamed me for having 
brought about my own illness. "Why did you have to go skiing up there! 
I've always said it's madness. With those long boards on your feet! Throw 
the sticks into the fire!" he would add every time in a clumsy attempt to 
conclude the conversation with a joke. 

Dr. Koch did not think I should expose my lung to the strain of 
Obersalzberg's mountain air. In the park of Klessheim Palace, Hitler s 
guest house near Salzburg, the prince-bishops of Salzburg had commis- 
sioned the great baroque architect Fischer von Erlach to build a charm- 
ingly curved pavilion now called the Cloverleaf Palace. On March 18 the 
renovated building was assigned to me for my convalescence. At the same 
time Admiral Horthy, the Regent of Hungary, was engaged in negotiations 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 334 

in the main palace which led to Hitler s last bloodless march into a foreign 
country, Hungary. On the evening of my arrival Hitler paid a visit to me 
during a pause in the negotiations. 

Seeing him again after an interval of ten weeks, I was for the first 
time in all the years I had known him struck by his overly broad nose and 
sallow color. I realized that his whole face was repulsive— the first sign 
that I was beginning to attain some perspective and see him with unbiased 
eyes. For almost a quarter of a year I had not been exposed to his personal 
influence but instead to his insults and reprimands. After years of frenzy 
and fever I had for the first time begun to think about the course I was 
pursuing at his side. Previously, he only needed to say a few words or to 
make a gesture in order to banish my states of exhaustion and release 
extraordinary energies in me; now, I felt— in spite of this reunion and in 
spite of Hitler s cordiality— just as weary and done in as I had before. All 
I wanted, all I was longing for, was to go to Meran with my wife and 
children as soon as possible; I wanted to spend many weeks there, to re- 
cover my strength. But I did not really know what I wanted my strength 
for, because I no longer had a goal. 

Nevertheless, my self-assertiveness stirred again when I was forced 
to realize, during those five days in Klessheim, that my enemies were 
using lies and intrigues to eliminate me once and for all. The day after 
Hitler's visit Goering telephoned to congratulate me on my birthday. 
When I took occasion, overstating somewhat, to give him a favorable re- 
port on my health, he answered me in a cheerful rather than regretful 
tone: "But come now, what you re saying isn't true at all. Dr. Gebhardt 
told me yesterday that you re suffering from serious heart disease. With- 
out any prospects for improvement, let me tell you! Maybe you don't 
know that yet!" With many words of praise for my previous achievements, 
Goering went on to hint at my impending demise. I told him that X-rays 
and electrocardiograms had found nothing wrong with me.* Goering re- 
plied that I had obviously been misinformed and simply refused to accept 
my account. But it was Gebhardt who had misinformed Goering. 

Hitler too, visibly downcast, told his cronies when my wife happened 
to be within hearing: "Speer wont be recovering!" He too had spoken to 
Gebhardt, who had pronounced me a wreck incapable of further work. 

Perhaps Hitler was thinking of our joint architectural dreams which 
I now would be prevented from carrying out by an incurable cardiac de- 
fect; perhaps he was also thinking of the early death of his first architect, 

*Dorsch also told Zeitzler: "Speer is incurably ill and will therefore not be 
coming back." Qotting by Zeitzler, May 17, 1944-) Afterward, Zeitzler informed me 
of this as an interesting sidelight on all the intrigues. According to Dr. Koch's "Sup- 
plementary Report," May 14, 19441 "On May 5, X-ray and electrocardiographic ex- 
aminations were undertaken. All three sections of the latter revealed no pathological 
conditions. The X-ray showed a completely normal heart." 



335 ) Illness 

Professor Troost At any rate, that same day he dropped in on me at Kless- 
heim with a surprise— a wreath of flowers so gigantic that his orderly could 
barely stagger in with it— a gesture really unusual for him. But a few hours 
after Hitler's departure Himmler called and officially informed me that 
Hitler had ordered Dr. Gebhardt to take over the responsibility for my 
safety in his capacity as an SS group leader and for my health as a 
physician. Thus Dr. Koch was excluded from my case. Instead I was now 
attended by an SS escort squad, which Gebhardt assigned to protect 
me. 5 

On March 23, Hitler came once again to pay a farewell visit, as if he 
sensed the estrangement which had taken place within me during my 
illness. And, in spite of his repeated evidences of the old cordiality, my 
feelings toward Hitler had altered by a distinctly perceptible nuance. I 
was lastingly stung by the fact that he recalled my former closeness to 
him only because he was now seeing me again, whereas my achievements 
as an architect and as a minister had not been important enough to 
bridge a separation of several weeks. Naturally, I understood that a man 
as overburdened as Hitler, working under the most extreme pressure, 
could be excused for neglecting those of his associates who were tem- 
porarily out of his sight. But his general conduct during the past weeks 
had demonstrated to me how little I really counted for in the group 
that formed his entourage and also how little he was prepared to accept 
reason and objective facts as the basis for his decisions. Perhaps because 
he sensed my coolness, perhaps also in order to console me, he said 
gloomily that his health too was in a bad way. In fact there were strong 
indications that he would soon be losing his eyesight. He had nothing 
to say to my remark that Dr. Brandt would inform him of the sound con- 
dition of my heart. 

Castle Goyen was situated on a height of land above Meran. Here 
I spent the six loveliest weeks of my time as Minister of Armaments, 
the only weeks I had with my family. Dr. Gebhardt had taken up quarters 
in a distant part of the valley and scarcely made use of his right to regulate 
my appointments. 

During these weeks I was staying in Meran, Goering, without asking 
me or even informing me, took my two assistants Dorsch and Sain: to sev- 
eral conferences with Hitler. For Goering this was an altogether unusual 
outburst of activity. Evidently he felt this was his chance to establish him- 
self once more as the second man after Hitler, after his many setbacks in 
the past few years. He was using my two assistants, who were not danger- 
ous to him, to strengthen himself at my expense. Furthermore, he spread 
the word that my departure from office could be expected, and during 
these weeks he asked Gauleiter Eigruber of the Upper Danube District 
what the party thought of General Manager Meindl. Goering, who was 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 336 

friendly with Meindl, explained that he was thinking of mentioning Meindl 
to Hitler as a possible successor to me. 6 Ley, already a Reichsleiter sad- 
dled with many official duties, likewise put in his claim. If Speer were 
going, he volunteered, then he would take on this work as well; he'd 
manage somehow! 

Meanwhile Bormann and Himmler were trying to undermine Hitler s 
confidence in the rest of my department heads by making grave accusa- 
tions against them. By roundabout ways— Hitler did not think it necessary 
to inform me— I heard that he was so annoyed with three of them— Liebel, 
Waeger, and Schieber— that they were as good as ousted. All it had taken 
was a few weeks for Hitler to forget what had seemed to be a renewal of 
our intimacy at Klessheim. Aside from Fromm, Zeitzler, Guderian, Milch, 
and Doenitz, only Minister of Economics Funk remained among the small 
group of top people who had shown some friendliness toward me during 
my weeks of illness. 

For months Hitler had been demanding that industry be transferred 
to caves and huge shelters so that production would continue despite the 
bombing. I had always answered that bombers could not be combated 
with concrete; it would have taken many years of work before our plants 
could be placed underground or behind massive concrete. Moreover, we 
were lucky in that the enemy's attacks on armaments production resem- 
bled strikes at the wide delta of a river which flowed into many subsidiary 
channels. If we started protecting this delta, we could only force him to 
attack where the industrial stream was concentrated in a deep narrow 
stream bed, I argued. In saying this I was thinking of the chemical indus- 
try, coal mines, power plants, and other of my nightmares. There is no 
doubt that at this time, in the spring of 1944, England and America could 
have completely shut off one of these production streams and thus made 
a mockery of all of our other efforts to protect industry. 

On April 14, Goering seized the initiative and summoned Dorsch. The 
huge shelters Hitler was demanding could only be constructed by the 
Todt Organization, so far as he could see, he said significantly. Dorsch 
pointed out that the Todt Organization was specifically confined to the 
occupied territories; it had no right to operate within the territory of the 
Reich. Still, he did have on hand a design for the kind of shelter wanted, 
although it had been projected for construction in France. 

That same evening Dorsch was summoned to Hitler. "You alone will 
be authorized to carry out the building of such major structures inside 
the Reich as well as outside/' Hitler said to him. By the next day Dorsch 
was able to propose several suitable locations and to explain the adminis- 
trative and technical requirements for erecting the six planned under- 
ground industrial sites, each with an area of over one million square feet 
The structures would be finished in November 1944, Dorsch promised. 7 

In one of his dreaded impulsive decrees Hitler made Dorsch his direct 



337 ) Illness 

subordinate and gave the big shelters so high a priority that all other 
construction projects would have to yield to them. Nevertheless it was 
fairly easy to predict that these six gigantic underground shelters would 
not be ready in the promised six months, in fact, that they could no longer 
even be started. It was not at all difficult to recognize the right course 
when the wrong one was so wrong. 

Before this, Hitler had not thought it necessary to tell me anything 
about these measures which cut so sharply into my powers. My injured 
self-esteem, the sense of having been personally offended, was certainly 
operative on April 19 when I wrote him a letter frankly questioning these 
decisions. This was the first of a long series of letters and memoranda in 
which, frequently concealed behind disagreements on matters of fact, I 
began to show some independence. It had taken long to evolve, after years 
of subjugation to Hitler s suggestive powers, and my insights were still 
murky. Nevertheless I spoke out rather clearly on the matter at hand. To 
begin such major building projects now, I told Hitler, was sheer delusion, 
for "there is already difficulty enough in meeting the minimal require- 
ments for sheltering German industrial workers and the foreign labor force 
and in simultaneously restoring our armaments factories. Any plans for 
launching construction for the long run have had to be shelved. What is 
more, I must constantly stop work on armaments plants already under 
construction in order to provide the basic necessities for maintaining Ger- 
man armaments production during the months immediately to come/' 

Along with arguments of this sort, I also reproached Hitler for having 
acted behind my back. "I have always, even in the days when I was your 
architect, followed the rule of letting my assistants work independently. 
I grant that this principle has often brought me severe disappointments, 
for not everyone is worthy of such trust, and some men, after having 
acquired sufficient prestige, have been disloyal to me." Hitler would not 
find it difficult to gather from this sentence that I was referring to Dorsch. 
My tone became definitely chiding as I continued: "But be this as it may, 
I will go on following this principle with iron consistency. In my view 
it is the only one that permits a man to govern and create. The higher 
the position, the more true this is." 

Construction and armaments, I pointed out, were at the present 
stage an indivisible whole. It would be well for Dorsch to remain in 
charge of construction work in the occupied territories, but in Germany 
itself we needed a separate director for these operations. I proposed one 
of Todt's former assistants, Willi Henne, for the job. Both men would 
have more than enough to do. They could administer their separate tasks 
under the direction of a loyal associate, Walter Brugmann. 8 

Hitler rejected this proposal. Five weeks later, on May 26, 1944, 
Brugmann was killed like my predecessor Todt in an unexplained plane 
crash. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 338 

The letter was handed to Hitler on the eve of his birthday by my 
old assistant Gerhard Frank. I ended it with an offer to resign if my views 
were unacceptable to Hitler. As I learned from the best possible source in 
this case, Hitlers chief secretary Johanna Wolf, Hitler displayed extraor- 
dinary annoyance at my letter. Among other things he spluttered: "Even 
Speer has to find out that there is such a thing as politics." 

He had had a similar reaction six weeks before when I called off the 
building of Berlin bunkers for prominent members of the regime in order 
to take care of severe damage from an air raid. Evidently, he had gained 
the impression that I was becoming headstrong. Or, at any rate, this is 
what he accused me of. In the affair of bunkers, he had Bormann inform 
me very sharply, without consideration for my illness, that "the commands 
of the Fuehrer are to be carried out by every German; they cannot be 
ignored or postponed or delayed at will." At the same time Hitler threat- 
ened "to have the Gestapo instantly arrest the responsible official for 
acting contrary to an order from the Fuehrer and taken to a concentration 
camp. 9 

No sooner had I learned of Hitler s reaction to my letter— again by 
roundabout ways— than Goering telephoned me from Obersalzberg. He 
had heard about my intention to resign, he said, but must inform me 
from the very highest source that the Fuehrer alone could dictate when 
a minister might depart from his service. 

Our conversation went angrily back and forth for half an hour until 
we agreed on a compromise action: "Instead of resigning I shall prolong 
my illness and silently disappear as a minister." 

Goering was in hearty agreement: "Yes, that's the solution. That's 
the way we can do it. The Fuehrer will surely accept that." 

In unpleasant situations Hitler always tried to avoid confrontations. 
He did not dare send for me and tell me to my face that after all that 
had happened he would have to draw the necessary conclusions and re- 
quest me to leave my post. Out of similar pusillanimity, a year later, when 
we had reached an open break, he again did not attempt to force my 
resignation. But in retrospect I must admit that it was certainly possible 
to make Hitler so angry that dismissal would inevitably result. In other 
words, those who remained members of his entourage did so voluntarily. 

Whatever my motives may have been at the time, in any case, I 
liked the idea of resigning. For I could see omens of the war's end almost 
every day in the blue southern sky when, flying provocatively low, the 
bombers of the American Fifteenth Air Force crossed the Alps from their 
Italian bases to attack German industrial targets. Not a German fighter 
plane anywhere in sight; no antiaircraft fire. This scene of total defense- 
lessness produced a greater impression upon me than any reports. Al- 
though we had so far succeeded time and again in replacing the weapons 
lost in our retreats, that would soon have to stop, I thought pessimistic- 
ally, in the face of this air offensive. How tempting to follow the line sug- 



339 ) Illness 

gested by Goering and, given the inexorably approaching disaster, not 
stand in a responsible position, but quietly disappear. But it did not occur 
to me to resign my post in order to put an end to my contribution and 
thus hasten the end of Hitler and his regime. In spite of all our dissensions 
that thought did not come to me then and in a similar situation probably 
would not come to me today. 

My escapist notions were interrupted on April 20 by a visit from one 
of my closest associates, Walter Rohland. For in the meantime word had 
seeped through to industry about my intention to resign, and Rohland 
had come to plead with me. "You have no right to put industry, which 
has followed you loyally to this day, at the mercy of those who will come 
after you. We can well imagine what they will be like! For us, the thing 
that matters from now on is what can we hang on to which will carry 
us through the period after a lost war. To help us with that, you have to 
stay at your post!" 

So far as I recollect, this was the first time that the specter of 
"scorched earth" loomed before me. For Rohland went on to speak of 
the fear that a desperate top leadership might order wholesale destruc- 
tion. Then and there, on that day, I felt something stirring within me 
that was quite apart from Hitler: a sense of responsibility toward the 
country and the people to save as much as possible of our industrial po- 
tential, so that the nation could survive the period after a lost war. But 
for the present it was still a vague and shadowy sense. 

Only a few hours later, toward one o'clock at night, Field Marshal 
Milch, Karl Saur, and Dr. Frank called on me. They had been traveling 
since the late afternoon and had come directly from Obersalzberg. Milch 
had brought me a verbal message from Hitler: He wanted to tell me 
how highly he esteemed me and how unchanged his relationship to me 
was. It sounded almost like a declaration of love. But, as I heard from 
Milch twenty-three years later, the statement had been more or less ex- 
torted from Hitler by Milch himself. 

Only a few weeks earlier I would have been touched and flooded 
with happiness to have received such a distinction. Now, however, my 
response to the declaration was: "No, I'm sick of it. I want nothing more 
to do with it all."* Milch, Saur, and Frank argued with me. I fended 
them off for a long time. Hitler's conduct seemed to me foolish and un- 
accountable, but after all I did not want to abandon my ministerial post 
now that Rohland had pointed out where my new responsibility lay. 
After hours of argument I yielded on condition that Dorsch would be 
placed under me again and the previous order of command restored. On 
the question of the giant shelters, however, I was now prepared to give 
in, feeling that it no longer mattered. 

The very next day Hitler signed a directive as I had drafted it that 

* Field Marshal Milch maintains today that I used the famous rough quotation 
from Goethe's Gotz von Berlichingen, "Kiss my ." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 340 

night: Dorsch would now build the shelters under my authority, though 
with the highest priority rating. 10 

Three days later, however, I realized that I had been hurried into 
an untenable arrangement. There was nothing to do but write to Hitler 
again. The program, as it now stood, was bound to cast me in an alto- 
gether ungrateful role. For if I supported Dorsch in building those under- 
ground hangars by supplying him with materials and labor, I would be 
forever in difficulties with other enterprises whose needs I could not 
meet. If I stinted Dorsch, on the other hand, I would be involved in 
everlasting complaints and endless "covering letters." It would therefore 
be more consistent, I told Hitler, if Dorsch should also assume respon- 
sibility for the other construction projects which competed with the build- 
ing of the underground hangars. Under present circumstances, I con- 
cluded, the best solution might be to divorce the entire construction 
area from armaments and war production. My new proposal was that 
Dorsch be appointed Inspector General for Building and made Hitler s 
direct subordinate. Any other arrangement, I said, would be complicated 
by the difficulties in my personal relationship with Dorsch. 

At this point I broke off my letter, for in the course of it I began to 
feel that this was something which had to be threshed out with Hitler 
personally. I wanted to fly to Obersalzberg. But obstacles arose. Dr. Geb- 
hardt reminded me that he was there to supervise my health and safety 
and would not permit me to leave. On the other hand Dr. Koch had 
already told me a few days before that I need have no worry about 
flying.* Gebhardt finally telephoned Himmler, who agreed to my flying 
provided that I saw him first, before my conference with Hitler. 

Himmler spoke frankly, which in such cases is always preferable. 
It seemed that conferences had already been held on the matter, with 
Goering present, and the decision already sealed that a separate agency 
should be set up for construction, to be headed by Dorsch and to be 
quite independent of the Armaments Ministry. Himmler wanted to ask 
me to make no more difficulties. Everything he said was a piece of ef- 
frontery; but since I had already come to the same conclusion, the con- 
versation went off pleasantly enough. 

No sooner had I arrived in my house at Obersalzberg than Hitler s 

I had privately invited Dr. Koch to Meran. Gebhardt complained to Brandt 
that Koch was persona non grata; he would see and hear too many things that were 
supposed to be kept secret. Koch then left Meran on April 20. In his affidavit Koch 
wrote: "I had a second clash with Gebhardt when Speer was already in Meran. At 
that time Speer asked me whether I considered him well enough to fly to Obersalz- 
berg— probably to see Hitler. I approved the trip, with the proviso that the airplane 
not fly above sixty to sixty-five hundred feet. When Gebhardt heard of my decision 
he made a scene. He again accused me of not being a 'political doctor/ Here, as in 
Hohenlychen, I had the impression that Gebhardt wanted to keep Speer in his 
clutches." 



34i ) Illness 

adjutant invited me to join the circle at teatime. But I wanted to talk with 
Hitler on an official plane. The intimate teatime atmosphere would un- 
doubtedly have smoothed over the ill feeling which had been accumulat- 
ing between us, but that was exactly what I wished to avoid. I therefore 
refused the invitation. Hitler understood this unusual gesture, and shortly 
afterward I was given an appointment to see him at the Berghof . 

Hitler had donned his uniform cap and, gloves in hand, posted himself 
officially at the entrance to the Berghof. He conducted me into his salon 
like a formal guest. All this made a strong impression on me, because 
I had no idea what the psychological purpose of this little scene was. 
From this point on there began, on my part, a period of an extremely 
schizoid relationship to Hitler. On the one hand he conferred distinctions 
upon me, gave me all sorts of signs of special favor which could not fail to 
affect me; on the other hand I was slowly growing aware that his actions 
were proving more and more dire for the German nation. And although 
the old magic still had its potency, although Hitler continued to prove his 
instinct for handling people, it became increasingly hard for me to remain 
unconditionally loyal to him. 

The fronts were curiously reversed not only during this cordial wel- 
come but also in our subsequent conversation: It was he who was court- 
ing me. For instance, he would not hear of constructions being removed 
from my jurisdiction and turned over to Dorsch. "I am determined not 
to separate these fields. You know I have nobody I can turn building 
over to. Such a misfortune that Dr. Todt was killed. You know what 
building means to me, Herr Speer. Please understand! I will approve 
sight unseen all the measures you think necessary for the construction 
area." 11 

In saying this Hitler was flatly reversing himself, for as I knew from 
Himmler, he had decided only a few days before that Dorsch would be 
entrusted with this work. As so often, he brushed aside the view he had 
only recently expressed and ignored Dorsch's feelings as well. This in- 
consistency was still another proof of his profound contempt for people. 
Moreover, I had to take into consideration the possibility that this new 
change of mind would not last. Therefore, I replied that this was some- 
thing which had to be settled on a long-term basis. "It will put me in an 
impossible position if this matter comes up for discussion again." 

Hitler promised to remain firm: "My decision is final. I will no longer 
consider changing it." He even went on to make little of the charges 
against my three department heads who had been, I knew, already slated 
for dismissal.* 

When we had finished our conversation, Hitler led me to the cloak- 

* Hitler hinted that Himmler suspected Schieber, my department head, of 
planning to flee Germany, that Mayor Liebel had political enemies, and that General 
Waeger was considered unreliable. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 342 

room again, took his hat and gloves, and prepared to accompany me to the 
door. This seemed to me a little too much officiality, and in the informal 
tone of his intimate circle I said that I had made an appointment upstairs 
with Below, his air force adjutant. That evening I sat in the group at the 
fireplace as in the past, with him, Eva Braun, and his court. The conversa- 
tion trickled along dully; Bormann proposed that records be played. A 
Wagner aria was put on, and soon afterward Die Fledermaus. 

After the ups and downs, the tensions and agonies of the recent past, 
I felt cheerful that evening. All the woes and causes of conflicts seemed 
cleared away. The uncertainty of the past weeks had deeply depressed 
me. I could not work without friendliness and appreciation. I felt I had 
come out victorious in a power struggle with Goering, Himmler, and Bor- 
mann. They were no doubt grinding their teeth now, for they must surely 
have thought they had finished me off. Perhaps— I was already speculat- 
ing—Hitler had just realized what sort of game was being played and 
recognized who had misled him and whom he could really trust. 

When I analyzed the complex of motives which so surprisingly led me 
back to this intimate circle, I realized that the desire to retain the position 
of power I had achieved was unquestionably a major factor. Even though 
I was only shining in the reflected light of Hitler s power— and I don t 
think I ever deceived myself on that score— I still found it worth striving 
for. I wanted, as part of his following, to gather some of his popularity, 
his glory, his greatness, around myself. Up to 1942, I still felt that my 
vocation as an architect allowed me a measure of pride that was inde- 
pendent of Hitler. But since then I had been bribed and intoxicated by the 
desire to wield pure power, to assign people to this and that, to say the 
final word on important questions, to deal with expenditures in the bil- 
lions. I thought I was prepared to resign, but I would have sorely missed 
the heady stimulus that comes with leadership. The deep misgivings I had 
been having lately were, moreover, put to rout by the appeal from the 
industrialists, as well as by Hitler's magnetic power, which he could still 
radiate with virtually undiminished force. To be sure, our relationship had 
developed a crack; my loyalty had become shaky, and I sensed that it 
would never again be what it had been. But for the present I was back in 
Hitler's circle— and content. 

Two days later I went to see Hitler again, accompanied by Dorsch, 
to present him as the newly appointed head of my construction sector. 
Hitler treated this occasion as I had expected: '1 leave it entirely to you, 
my dear Speer, what arrangements you wish to make in your Ministry. 
Whom you assign is your affair. Of course I agree about Dorsch, but the 
responsibility for construction remains entirely yours." 12 

It looked like victory; but I had learned that victories did not count 
for much. Tomorrow the whole picture might be changed. 



343 ) Vlness 

I informed Goering of the new situation with deliberate coolness. I 
had actually gone over his head when I decided to appoint Dorsch my 
representative in construction matters within the Four-Year Plan because, 
as I wrote with a note of sarcasm, "I assumed you would unquestionably 
be fully in accord." Goering replied curtly and rather angrily: "Very much 
in accord with everything. Have already placed entire construction ap- 
paratus of the air force under Dorsch." 13 

Himmler showed no reaction; in such cases he could be as slippery 
as a fish. In the case of Bormann, however, the wind began visibly turning 
in my favor for the first time in two years. For he instantly realized that I 
had carried off a considerable coup and that all the deep-dyed plots of the 
past several months had failed. He was neither man enough nor powerful 
enough to cultivate his grudge against me in the face of such a reversal. 
Visibly pained by my conspicuous manner of ignoring him, he assured me 
at the first opportunity— on one of the group walks to the teahouse— with 
excessive cordiality that he had not had any part in the grand intrigue 
against me. Perhaps it was true, although I found it hard to believe him; 
and at any rate in so saying he was admitting that there had been a grand 
intrigue. 

Soon afterward he invited Lammers and me to his home at Ober- 
salzberg. I was at once struck by its lack of any personal character. 
Abruptly and rather importunately, he insisted on our drinking, and after 
midnight he offered to exchange the familiar Du of intimacy with Lam- 
mers and me. The very next day, however, I pretended that this attempt 
at rapprochement had never happened, while Lammers made a point of 
using the f amiliar form of address. That did not keep Bormann from ruth- 
lessly driving Lammers into a corner shortly afterward, while he accepted 
my snub without any reaction, or rather with increasing cordiality— at any 
rate as long as Hitler was obviously well disposed toward me. 

In the middle of May 1944, during a visit to the Hamburg shipyards, 
Gauleiter Kaufmann confidentially informed me that even after half a 
year the resentment over my speech to the Gauleiters had not yet sub- 
sided. Almost all the Gauleiters disliked me, he said; and Bormann was 
encouraging this attitude. Kaufmann warned me of the danger that 
threatened me from this side. 

I thought this hint important enough to mention it to Hitler in the 
course of my next conversation with him. He had again conferred a 
distinction upon me by a little gesture, inviting me for the first time up 
to his wood-paneled study on the second floor of the Berghof, where he 
generally held only extremely personal and intimate discussions. In his 
private tone, almost like an intimate friend, he advised me to avoid doing 
anything that would arouse the Gauleiters against me. I should never 
underestimate their power, he said, for that would complicate things for 
me in the future. He was well aware of their shortcomings, he said; many 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 344 

were simple-hearted swashbucklers, rather rough, but loyal. I had to take 
them as they were. Hitler's whole tone suggested that he was not going 
to let Bormann influence him in his attitude toward me. "I certainly have 
received complaints, but the matter is settled as far as I am concerned," 
he said. Thus this part of Bormanns offensive had also failed. 

Hitler, too, had probably become entangled in contradictory feelings. 
For he now informed me, as if asking me not to take it amiss, of his inten- 
tion to confer the Reich's highest distinction upon Himmler. For the 
Reichsfiihrer-SS deserved it for some very special services, he added 
almost apologetically.* I replied good-humoredly that I would wait until 
after the war when I hoped to receive the no less valuable decoration for 
art and science for my achievements as an architect. Nevertheless, Hitler 
seemed to have been worried about how I would react to this show of 
favor for Himmler. 

What was really bothering me on that day was that Bormann might 
show Hitler an article from the British newspaper The Observer (of April 
9, 1944) in which I was described as a foreign body in the party-doctrin- 
aire works. I could easily imagine him doing so, and even the caustic re- 
marks he would make. In order to anticipate Bormann, I myself handed 
Hitler the translation of this article, commenting jokingly on it as I did 
so. With considerable fuss Hitler put on his glasses and began to read: 

Speer is, in a sense, more important for Germany today than Hitler, 
Himmler, Goering, Goebbels, or the generals. They all have, in a way, 
become the mere auxiliaries of the man who actually directs the giant 
power machine— charged with drawing from it the maximum effort under 
maximum strain. ... In him is the very epitome of the 'managerial revo- 
lution/' 

Speer is not one of the flamboyant and picturesque Nazis. Whether he 
has any other than conventional political opinions at all is unknown. He 
might have joined any other political party which gave him a job and a 
career. He is very much the successful average man, well dressed, civil, 
noncorrupt, very middle-class in his style of life, with a wife and six 
children. Much less than any of the other German leaders does he stand for 
anything particularly German or particularly Nazi. He rather symbolizes a 
type which is becoming increasingly important in all belligerent countries: 
the pure technician, the classless bright young man without background, 
with no other original aim than to make his way in the world and no other 
means than his technical and managerial ability. It is the lack of psycho- 

* The decoration in question was the Teutonic Order, whose holders were sup- 
posed to form a confraternity. Hitler never carried out his plan; Himmler was not 
given the decoration, which had previously been awarded only posthumously. The 
decoration for which I had expressed my preference was the National Prize. It was 
thickly encrusted with diamonds and so heavy that the wearer had to have a pendant 
inside his dinner jacket to carry the weight. 



345 ) Alness 

logical and spiritual ballast, and the ease with which he handles the terri- 
fying technical and organizational machinery of our age, which makes this 
slight type go extremely far nowadays. . . . This is their age; the Hitlers 
and Himmlers we may get rid of, but the Speers, whatever happens to this 
particular special man, will long be with us. 

Hitler read the long commentary straight through, folded the sheet, 
and handed it back to me without a word but with great respect. 

During the following weeks and months I became more and more 
aware, in spite of everything, of the distance that had grown up between 
Hitler and me. It increased steadily. Nothing is more difficult than to re- 
store authority after it has been shaken. After my first experiment in 
opposing Hitler, I had become more independent in my thinking and 
acting. And Hitler, instead of being enraged, had seemed only rather per- 
plexed by my new attitude and tried to propitiate me, even to the point 
of retracting a decision he had made with Himmler, Goering, and Bor- 
mann. Although I too had given way, I had learned the valuable lesson 
that a resolute stand against Hitler could achieve results. 

Nevertheless, even this episode did not shake my faith in Hitler. At 
best it made me begin to doubt the rectitude of this system of rule. Thus, 
I was outraged that the leaders continued to exempt themselves from 
any of the sacrifices they expected of the people; that they recklessly 
expended lives and property; that they pursued their sordid intrigues, 
showing themselves as totally unethical even toward each other. 
Thoughts of this sort may have contributed to my slowly freeing myself. 
Still hesitantly, I was beginning to bid farewell, farewell to my previous 
life, tasks, ties, and to the thoughtlessness that had brought me to this pass. 



24 

The War Thrice Lost 



ON MAY 8, 1944, I RETURNED TO BERLIN TO RESUME MY WORK. I SHALL 

never forget the date May 12, four days later. On that day the tech- 
nological war was decided.* Until then we had managed to produce 
approximately as many weapons as the armed forces needed, in spite of 
their considerable losses. But with the attack of nine hundred and thirty- 
five daylight bombers of the American Eighth Air Force upon several fuel 
plants in central and eastern Germany, a new era in the air war began. 
It meant the end of German armaments production. 

The next day, along with technicians of the bombed Leuna Works, 
we groped our way through a tangle of broken and twisted pipe systems. 
The chemical plants had proved to be extremely sensitive to bombing; 
even optimistic forecasts could not envisage production being resumed 
for weeks. After this attack our daily output of five thousand, eight hun- 
dred and fifty metric tons dropped to four thousand, eight hundred and 
twenty metric tons. Still, together with our reserve of five hundred and 
seventy-four thousand metric tons of aircraft fuel, that could see us 
through more than nineteen months. 

On May 19, 1944, after I had taken measure of the consequences of the 
attack, I flew to Obersalzberg, where Hitler received me in the presence 
of General Keitel. I described the situation in these words: "The enemy 
has struck us at one of our weakest points. If they persist at it this time, 
we will soon no longer have any fuel production worth mentioning. Our 

(346) 



347 ) The War Thrice Lost 

one hope is that the other side has an air force General Staff as scatter- 
brained as ours!" 

Keitel, who was always trying to please Hitler, hastened to say that 
he would be able to bridge the gap with his reserves. He concluded with 
Hitlers standard argument: "How many difficult situations we have 
already survived!" And turning to Hitler, he said: "We shall survive this 
one too, mein Fuhrer!" 

But this time Hitler did not seem to share Keitel's optimism. Along 
with Goering, Keitel, and Milch, four industrialists, Krauch, Pleiger, Biite- 
fisch, and E. R. Fischer, as well as Kehrl, chief of the Planning and Raw 
Materials Department, were called in for a further discussion of the 
situation.** Goering tried to keep out the representatives of the fuel in- 
dustry. Such important matters had better be discussed in privacy, he said. 
But Hitler had already settled on the participants. 

Four days later we were all waiting in the inhospitable entrance hall 
of the Berghof for Hitler, who was conducting a conference in the salon. 
Beforehand, I had asked the fuel industry people to tell Hitler the unvar- 
nished truth. But Goering used the last few minutes before the beginning 
of the meeting to exhort the industrialists not to say anything too pessi- 
mistic. He was probably afraid that Hitler would place the blame for 
the debacle chiefly on him. 

Several high-ranking military men, participants in the preceding meet- 
ing, hurried past us. We were immediately called in by one of the adju- 
tants. Although Hitler shook hands with each of us, his welcome was 
terse and absent-minded. He asked us all to sit down and declared that 
he had called this meeting in order to be informed about the consequences 
of the latest air raids. Then he asked the representatives of industry 
for their opinion. Speaking as sober, statistically minded businessmen, they 
all testified to the hopelessness of the situation if the raids were continued 
systematically. Hitler, to be sure, at first tried to dispel such pessimistic 
verdicts by stereotyped interjections such as: "You'll manage it some- 
how," or, "We've been through worse crises." And Keitel and Goering 
instantly seized upon these cues, going even beyond Hitler in their con- 

° There had certainly been critical situations before this— the bombings of the 
Ruhr reservoirs, for instance, or of the ball-bearing plants. But the enemy had always 
demonstrated a lack of consistency; he switched from target to target or attacked in 
the wrong places. In February 1944 he bombed the enormous airframe plants of the 
aircraft industry rather than the engine factories, although the most important factor 
in airplane production was the number of engines we were able to turn out. Destruc- 
tion of the plants making these would have blocked any increase in aircraft manu- 
facture, especially since, in contrast to the airframe plants, engine factories could not 
be dispersed among forests and caves. 

*° Krauch was the director of the chemical industry, Pleiger was Reich Com- 
missioner for Coal and also the manager of important fuel plants, Butefisch was head 
of the Leuna Works, and Fischer was Chairman of the Board of I. G. Farben. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 348 

fidence in the future and trying to blur the effect of our factual argu- 
ments. Keitel, in particular, harped upon his fuel reserve. But the indus- 
trialists were made of sterner stuff than Hitlers entourage. They held 
fast to their verdicts, supporting them by data and comparative figures. 

All at once Hitler executed one of his sudden turns and began to urge 
them to evaluate the situation in the most objective terms. It seemed as 
if at last he wanted to hear the unpleasant truth, as if he were tired of 
all the concealments, the false optimism, and the lying servilities. He 
himself summed up the result of the conference: "In my view die fuel, 
Buna rubber, and nitrogen plants represent a particularly sensitive point 
for the conduct of the war, since vital materials for armaments are being 
manufactured in a small number of plants." 1 

Torpid and absent-minded though he had seemed at the beginning, 
Hitler left the impression of a sober, intense man of keen insight. The 
only trouble was that a few months later, when the worst had already 
happened, he no longer wanted to acknowledge these insights. On the 
other hand, Goering scolded us as soon as we were back in the anteroom 
for having burdened Hitler with anxieties and pessimistic nonsense. 

The cars drove up. Hitler s guests went to the Berchtesgadener Hof 
for some refreshments. For on such occasions Hitler regarded the Berghof 
merely as a conference site; he felt no obligations as a host. But now, 
after the participants in the meeting had left, members of his private 
circle poured out of all the rooms on the upper story. Hitler had with- 
drawn for a few minutes; we waited in the vestibule. He took his cane, 
hat, and black cape; the daily tramp to the teahouse began. There we 
were served coffee and cake. The fire crackled in the fireplace; trivial 
talk was made. Hitler let himself be wafted into a friendlier world. It was 
all too clear how much he needed that. To me, too, he said not another 
word about the danger hanging over our heads. 

After sixteen days of feverish repairs we had just reached the former 
production level when the second attack wave struck on May 28-29, 1944. 
This time a mere four hundred bombers of the American Eighth Air 
Force delivered a greater blow than twice that number in the first attack. 
Concurrently, the American Fifteenth Air Force struck at the principal 
refineries in the Rumanian oil fields at Ploesti. Now production was actu- 
ally reduced by half. 2 Our pessimistic statements at Obersalzberg had 
thus been fully confirmed only five days later, and Goering's bold bluster 
had been refuted. Occasional remarks of Hitler's subsequently suggested 
that Goering's standing had sunk to a new low. 

It was not only for utilitarian reasons that I moved quickly to take 
advantage of Goering's weakness. Having done so well in the production 
of fighter planes we had, to be sure, every reason to propose to Hitler 
that my Ministry take charge of all air armaments. 3 But my motive was 
largely a desire to pay Goering back for his treacheries during my illness. 



349 ) The War Thrice Lost 

On June 4, I requested Hitler, who was still directing the war from 
Obersalzberg, "to influence the Reich Marshal so that he will call upon 
me of his own accord, and the proposal to incorporate production of air 
armaments in my Ministry will proceed from him." 

Hitler did not object to my challenging Goering in this way. More- 
over, he understood that this little strategem of mine would spare Goe- 
ring's pride and prestige. He therefore took up my suggestion, saying 
with considerable forcefulness: "Air armaments must be incorporated into 
your Ministry; that is beyond discussion. Til send for the Reich Marshal 
at once and inform him of my intentions. You discuss the details of the 
transfer with him/' 4 

Only a few months before Hitler had gone to great lengths to avoid 
saying anything outright to his old paladin. He had, for example, sent 
me to see Goering in his hideaway in the remote Rominten Heath to 
discuss some third-rate unpleasantness that I have long since forgotten. 
Goering must have guessed my assignment, for contrary to his usual 
custom he treated me like a highly honored guest, had horses and car- 
riage readied for a tour of the huge hunting preserve that went on for 
hours, and chattered away without pause or point, so that in the end 
I returned to Hitler having accomplished nothing. I never had a chance 
to say a word about my mission. Hitler knew Goering well enough to 
sympathize with my plight. 

This time Goering did not try to dodge the issue by pretending cor- 
diality. Our discussion took place in the private study of his house at 
Obersalzberg. Hitler had already told him what was in question. Goering 
complained bitterly about Hitlers somersaults. Only two weeks ago, 
Goering said, Hitler had wanted to take the construction industry away 
from me; it had all been settled, and then, after a short talk with me, 
he had undone it all. That was how things always were. Unfortunately 
the Fuehrer was all too frequently not a man of firm decisions. Naturally, 
if that was how Hitler wanted it, he would turn air armaments produc- 
tion over to me, Goering said resignedly. But it was all very baffling, 
since only a short while ago Hitler had thought that I had too many jobs 
on my hands as it was. 

Although I too had begun to notice these sudden alternations of 
favor and disfavor and recognized them as dangerous to my own future, 
I confess that I found a certain justice in seeing Goering's and my roles 
exchanged. On the other hand I did not try to humble Goering publicly. 
Instead of preparing a decree for Hitler, I arranged to have Goering 
himself transfer the responsibility for air armaments to my Ministry. He 
issued the decree. 5 

My takeover of the air armaments industry was a minor matter com- 
pared with the havoc being wrought in Germany by the enemy air forces. 
After a pause of only two weeks, during which their air strength was 
mostly used for supporting the invasion, the Allies staged a new series of 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 350 

attacks which put many fuel plants out of action. On June 22, nine- 
tenths of the production of airplane fuel was knocked out; only six hun- 
dred and thirty-two metric tons were produced daily. The attacks then 
lessened somewhat, and on July 17, we once more attained two thousand 
three hundred and seven metric tons, forty percent of our original pro- 
duction. But on July 21, only four days later, we were down to one hun- 
dred and twenty tons daily production— virtually done for. Ninety-eight 
percent of our aircraft fuel plants were out of operation. 

Then, the enemy permitted us to restore the great Leuna chemical 
works partially, so that by the end of July our production of airplane fuel 
was up to six hundred and nine tons again. By now we considered it a 
triumph to reach at least a tenth of our former production. The many 
attacks had taken such a toll of the piping systems in the chemical plants 
that direct hits were no longer required to do extensive damage. Merely 
the shock of bombs exploding in the vicinity caused leaks everywhere. 
Repairs were almost impossible. In August we reached ten percent, in 
September five and a half percent, in October ten percent again— of our 
former capacity. In November 1944 we ourselves were surprised when we 
reached twenty-eight percent (one thousand six hundred and thirty-three 
metric tons daily). 6 

"In view of the highly colored reports from Wehrmacht sources, the 
Minister fears that the extent of our critical situation has not been fully 
recognized," my Office Journal for July 22, 1944, records. The "Minister" 
therefore sent a memorandum to Hitler six days later on the fuel situa- 
tion. Passages of this memorandum agreed almost word for word with 
the first memorandum of June 30.* Both documents stated plainly that 
the outlook for July and August was such that we would have to consume 
most of our reserves of aircraft and other fuels, and that, afterward, 
there would be a gap we could no longer close, which would inevitably 
lead "to tragic consequences." 7 

Along with these grim predictions I proposed various alternatives 
which might help us avoid these consequences, or at least postpone them. 
Above all, I asked Hitler for power to declare a total mobilization of all 
our resources. I suggested that Edmund Geilenberg, the successful head 
of oui munitions organization, be given every opportunity to restore fuel 

* On May 22, I had obtained the appointment of my friend Colonel von Below, 
Hitler's air force adjutant, as my liaison man to Hitler. According to Point 8 of the 
FiihrerprotokoU, May 22-25, 1944, Below's assignment was "to keep me constantly 
informed about the Fuehrer's remarks." This system was intended to forestall any 
further surprises of the land that had beset me during my illness. Von Below was also 
to deliver my memoranda to Hitler in the future. It was useless for me to hand them 
to Hitler in person because he usually demanded that I summarize them for him and 
then interrupted before I had finished. Von Below reported that Hitler read this 
memorandum and the succeeding ones carefully, even underlining certain points and 
writing marginal comments. 



35i ) The War Thrice Lost 

production by ruthlessly confiscating materials, cutting down on other 
manufacturing, and drawing on skilled workers. At first Hitler refused: 
"If I give him such powers, first thing you know we'll have fewer tanks. 
That wont do. I can't allow that under any condition." 

Obviously he had still not grasped the gravity of the situation, even 
though in the meantime we had talked about the emergency often enough. 
Again and again, I had explained to him that it would be pointless to have 
tanks if we could not produce enough fuel. Hitler gave his consent only 
after I had promised him high tank production and Saur had confirmed 
this promise. Two months later a hundred and fifty thousand workers had 
been assigned to rebuilding the hydrogenation plants. A large percentage 
of these constituted skilled workers whose labor was indispensable for 
armaments production. By the late fall of 1944 ^ e number had risen to 
three hundred and fifty thousand. 

Even as I was dictating my memorandum, I was aghast at the incom- 
prehension of our leadership. On my desk lay reports from my Planning 
Department on the daily production losses, on plants knocked out, and 
the time required for starting them up again. But all these projections 
were made on the clear premise that we would manage to prevent or 
at least reduce enemy air raids. On July 28, 1944, I implored Hitler in 
my memorandum to "reserve a significantly larger part of the fighter 
plane production for the home front." 8 I repeatedly asked him in the 
most urgent terms whether it would not be more useful "to give suffi- 
ciently high priority to protecting the home hydrogenation plants by 
fighter planes so that in August and September at least partial produc- 
tion will be possible, instead of following the previous method which 
makes it a certainty that in September or October the Luftwaffe both 
at the front and at home will be unable to operate because of the 
shortage of fuel."* 

This was the second time I had addressed these questions to Hitler. 
After our Obersalzberg conference at the end of May he had agreed to 
a plan drawn up by Galland providing that out of our increased pro- 
duction of fighter planes an air fleet would be assembled which would 
be reserved for defense of the home industry. Goering, for his part— after 
a major conference at Karinhall where the representatives of the fuel in- 
dustry had again described the urgency of the situation— had solemnly 
promised that this "Reich" air fleet would never be diverted to the front. 
But once the invasion began, Hitler and Goering had the planes com- 
mitted in France. There the entire fleet was knocked out within a few 
weeks without having done any visible good. Now, at the end of July, 
Hitler and Goering renewed their promise. Once more a force of two 
thousand fighter planes was set up for home defense. It was to be ready 

* According to Galland, at that time there were only about two hundred fighter 
planes on Reich territory available for repelling daytime attacks. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 352 

to start in September. But once again the basic failure to comprehend 
the situation made a farce of this provision. 

With benefit of hindsight I stated to an armaments conference on 
December 1, 1944: "We must realize that the men on the enemy side 
who are directing the economic air raids know something about German 
economic life; that there— in contrast to our bombings— wise planning 
exists. Fortunately for us the enemy began following this strategy only 
in the last half or three-quarters of a year. . . . Before that he was, at 
least from his standpoint, committing absurdities." When I said that 
I did not know that as early as December 9, 1942, a good two years 
before, a working paper of the American Economic Warfare Division 
had stated that it was "better to cause a high degree of destruction in 
a few really essential industries or services than to cause a small degree of 
destruction in many industries." The effects of such selective bombing, the 
experts pointed out, were cumulative, and they argued that the plan once 
adopted should be pursued with unyielding resolution. 9 

The idea was correct, the execution defective. 

As early as August 1942, Hitler had assured the naval leadership 
that the Allies could not make a successful invasion unless they were 
able to take a sizable port. 10 Without one, he pointed out, an enemy 
landing at any point on the coast could not receive sufficient supplies 
long enough to withstand counterattacks by the German forces. Given 
the great length of the French, Belgian, and Dutch coasts, a complete 
line of pillboxes spaced close enough to offer mutual protection would 
have far exceeded the capacity of the German construction industry. 
Moreover, there were not enough soldiers available to man such a large 
number of pillboxes. Consequently, the larger ports were ringed with 
pillboxes, while the intervening coastal areas were only protected by 
observation bunkers at long intervals. Some fifteen thousand smaller 
bunkers were intended to shelter the soldiers during the shelling prior 
to an attack. As Hitler conceived it, however, during the actual attack 
the soldiers would come out into the open, since a protected position 
undermines those qualities of courage and personal initiative which were 
essential for battle. 

Hitler planned these defensive installations down to the smallest 
details. He even designed the various types of bunkers and pillboxes, 
usually in the hours of the night. The designs were only sketches, but 
they were executed with precision. Never sparing in self-praise, he often 
remarked that his designs ideally met all the requirements of a frontline 
soldier. They were adopted almost without revision by the general of 
the Corps of Engineers. 

For this task we consumed, in barely two years of intensive building, 
seventeen million three hundred thousand cubic yards of concrete 11 



353 ) The War Thrice Lost 

worth 3.7 billion DM. In addition the armaments factories were deprived 
of 1.2 million metric tons of iron. All this expenditure and effort was 
sheer waste. By means of a single brilliant technical idea the enemy 
bypassed these defenses within two weeks after the first landing. For as 
is well known, the invasion troops brought their own port with them. 
At Arromanches and Omaha Beach they built loading ramps and other 
installations on the open coast, following carefully laid-out plans. Thus 
they were able to assure their supplies of ammunition, implements, and 
rations, as well as the landing of reinforcements.* Our whole plan of 
defense had proved irrelevant. 

Rommel, whom Hitler had appointed inspector of the coastal de- 
fenses in the west at the end of 1943, showed more foresight. Shortly 
after his appointment Hitler had invited him to the East Prussian head- 
quarters. After a long conference he had accompanied the Field Mar- 
shal outside his bunker, where I was waiting since I had the next 
appointment. Apparently the discussion they were having flared up once 
more when Rommel bluntly told Hitler: "We must repulse the enemy 
at his first landing site. The pillboxes around the ports don t do the 
trick. Only primitive but effective barriers and obstacles all along the 
coast can make the landing so difficult that our countermeasures will 
be effective." 

Rommel went on in a succinct, firm manner: If we dont manage 
to throw them back at once, the invasion will succeed in spite of the 
Atlantic Wall. Toward the end in Tripoli and Tunis the bombs were 
dropped in such concentrations that even our best troops were demoral- 
ized. If you cannot check the bombing, all the other methods will be 
ineffective, even the barriers. ,, 

Rommel spoke courteously, but aloofly; he noticeably avoided the 
formula, "mein Fiihrer." He too had acquired the reputation of being 
a technical expert; in Hitler s eyes he had become a kind of specialist 
in combating Western offensives. That was the only reason Hitler re- 
ceived Rommel's criticism calmly. But he seemed to have been waiting 
for the last argument about the concentrated bombings. "Here is some- 
thing I wanted to show you today in that connection, Field Marshal." 
Hitler led the two of us to an experimental vehicle, a completely armored 
truck on which an 8.8 centimeter antiaircraft gun was mounted. Sol- 
diers demonstrated the speed with which it could be fired and the 

* According to W. S. Roskill, The War at Sea (London, 1961), Vol. Ill, Part 2, 
the landing could never have been carried out without these harbors. Some four hun- 
dred ships with a total displacement of a million and a half tons were used; some of 
them were sunk to form a breakwater. The construction time was doubled because of 
storms; yet after ten days the harbors began to take shape, and from July 8 on the 
British harbor at Avranches handled six thousand tons daily, whereas the American 
harbor was not yet completed. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 354 

safeguards against side-sway when it was fired. "How many of these 
can you deliver in the next few months, Herr Saur?" Hitler asked. 
Saur promised a few hundred. "You see, with this armored flak weapon 
we can take care of the concentration of bombers over our divisions." 
Had Rommel given up arguing against so much amateurishness? 
At any rate, he responded with a contemptuous, almost pitying smile. 
When Hitler saw that he could not draw out the expressions of con- 
fidence he had been hoping for, he curtly bade Rommel good-by 
and returned to his bunker, out of sorts, for the conference with Saur 
and me. He did not mention the episode. Later, after the invasion, Sepp 
Dietrich gave me a vivid account of the demoralizing effect of massed 
bombing on his elite divisions. The soldiers who had survived were 
thrown completely off balance, reduced to apathy. Even if they were 
uninjured, their fighting spirit was shattered for days. 

On June 6, I was at the Berghof about ten o'clock in the morning 
when one of Hitler's military adjutants told me that the invasion had 
begun early that morning. 

"Has the Fuehrer been awakened?" I asked. 

He shook his head. "No, he receives the news after he has eaten 
breakfast." 

In recent days Hitler had kept on saying that the enemy would 
probably begin with a feigned attack in order to draw our troops away 
from the ultimate invasion site. So no one wanted to awaken Hitler 
and be ranted at for having judged the situation wrongly. 

At the situation conference in the Berghof salon a few hours later 
Hitler seemed more set than ever on his preconceived idea that the 
enemy was only trying to mislead him. "Do you recall? Among the 
many reports we've received there was one that exactly predicted the 
landing site and the day and hour. That only confirms my opinion that 
this is not the real invasion yet." 

The enemy intelligence service had deliberately played this in- 
formation into his hands, Hitler maintained, in order to divert him 
from the true invasion site and lure him into committing his divisions 
too soon and in the wrong place. Misled by a correct report, he now 
rejected his originally accurate view that the Normandy coast would 
probably be the focus of the invasion. 

During the previous several weeks, Hitler had received contra- 
dictory predictions on the time and place of the invasion from the 
rival intelligence organizations of the SS, the Wehrmacht, and the 
Foreign Office. As in so many other fields, in this one too Hitler had 
taken over the task, difficult enough for the professionals, of deciding 
which report was the right one, which intelligence service deserved 
more confidence, which one had penetrated more deeply into the 



355 ) The War Thrice Lost 

enemy's counsels. Now he scoffed at the various services, calling them 
all incompetent, and, growing more and more heated, attacked intel- 
ligence in general. "How many of those fine agents are paid by the 
Allies, eh? Then they deliberately plant confusing reports. I won t even 
pass this one on to Paris. We simply have to hold it back. Otherwise 
it will only make our staffs nervous." 

It was noon before the most urgent question of the day was 
decided: to throw the OKW reserve in France against the Anglo- 
American bridgehead. For Hitler had the final say on the disposition 
of every division. He had even been inclined to ignore the demand 
of Field Marshal Rundstedt, the Commander in Chief of the western 
theater of war, that these divisions be held in reserve for the impend- 
ing battle. Because of this delay two armored divisions were no 
longer able to use the night of June 6-7 for their advance. By daylight 
their deployment was held up by the enemy bombers, and even be- 
fore they made contact with the enemy they suffered severe losses 
in men and materiel. 

This day so crucial for the course of the war had not, as might 
have been expected, been at all a turbulent one. Especially in dra- 
matic situations, Hitler tried to maintain his calm— and his staff imi- 
tated this self-control. It would have been an infraction of the usual 
tone of casual discourse to show nervousness or anxiety. 

But during the following days and weeks, in characteristic but 
more and more absurd mistrust, Hitler remained convinced that the 
invasion was merely a feint whose purpose was to trick him into 
deploying his defensive forces wrongly. He continued to hold that the 
real invasion would take place at another spot which would have mean- 
while been stripped of troops. The navy, too, considered the terrain un- 
favorable for large-scale landings, he declared. For the time being he 
expected the decisive assault to take place in the vicinity of Calais— as 
though he were determined that the enemy, too, would prove him to 
have been right. For there, around Calais, he had ever since 1942 been 
emplacing the heaviest naval guns under many feet of concrete to destroy 
an enemy landing fleet. This was the reason he did not commit the 
Fifteenth Army, stationed at Calais, to the battlefield on the coast of 
Normandy.* 

Hitler had still other grounds for expecting an attack across the 
Straits of Dover. Fifty-five positions had been prepared along it, from 
which several hundred "flying bombs" were to be launched toward Lon- 

* The enemy was counting on finding Hitler more determined. According to 
W. F. Craven and J. L. Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, Vol. Ill, on 
D-Day and the following days the twelve railroad bridges and the fourteen regular 
bridges over the Seine were destroyed by the American Ninth Air Force in order to 
prevent the German Fifteenth Army, drawn up near Calais, from regrouping. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 356 

don daily. Hitler assumed that the real invasion would be directed pri- 
marily against these launching ramps. He refused to admit that the Allies 
could take this part of France quite quickly from Normandy. Rather, he 
was counting on being able to restrict the enemy bridgehead and whittle 
it down in heavy battles. 

Hitler and all of us hoped that this new weapon, the V-i, would sow 
horror, confusion, and paralysis in the enemy camp. We far overestimated 
its effects. I myself did have some doubts because of the low speed of 
these flying bombs and therefore advised Hitler to launch them only 
when there were low-lying clouds. 12 But he paid no attention. On June 
22, in response to Hitlers premature command, the first V-i pilotless jets 
were catapulted off their launch ramps in great haste. Only ten of them 
could be dispatched, and only five reached London. Hitler forgot that he 
himself had insisted on rushing matters and vented his fury at the bungled 
project upon the builders. At the situation conference Goering hastened 
to shift the blame to his opponent Milch, and Hitler was on the point 
of deciding to halt the production of the flying bomb on the grounds 
that it was a wasteful blunder. Then the press chief handed him some 
exaggerated, sensationalized reports from the London press on the effects 
of the V-i. Hitlers mood promptly changed. Now he demanded increased 
production; and Goering too declared that this great achievement of his 
air force had always been a favorite project of his. Nothing more was 
said about Milch, the previous day's scapegoat. 

Before the invasion Hitler had emphasized that immediately after 
the landing he would go to France to conduct operations in person. In 
view of this, at an expense of countless millions of marks, hundreds of 
miles of telephone cables were laid and two headquarters built by the 
Todt Organization, employing large quantities of concrete and expensive 
installations. Hitler himself had fixed on the location and the size of the 
headquarters. He justified the tremendous outlay during this period, when 
he was losing France, by remarking that at least one of the headquarters 
was situated precisely at the future western border of Germany and 
therefore could serve as part of a system of fortifications. 

On June 17, he visited this headquarters, called W2, situated be- 
tween Soissons and Laon. That same day he returned to Obersalzberg. 
He was sulky and cross: "Rommel has lost his nerve; he's become a pessi- 
mist. In these times only optimists can achieve anything." 

After such remarks it was only a question of time when Rommel 
would be relieved of his command. For Hitler still regarded his defensive 
positions opposite the bridgehead as unconquerable. But that same eve- 
ning he remarked to me that W 2 seemed to him too unsafe, situated as it 
was in the heart of partisan-ridden France. 

On June 22, 1944, almost at the same time as the Anglo-American 
invasion was achieving its first great successes, a Soviet offensive was 



357 ) The War Thrice Lost 

initiated— which was soon to lead to the loss of twenty-five German divi- 
sions. Now the Red Army's advance could no longer be halted even in 
the summer. There can be no question that during these weeks, when 
three fronts were collapsing— in the West, in the East, and in the air- 
Hitler demonstrated steady nerves and an astonishing capacity for per- 
severance. No doubt the long struggle for power, with its many setbacks, 
had hardened his will as it had that of Goebbels and other of his fel- 
lows of that period. Perhaps the experiences of the "time of struggle, ,, 
as it was always called, had taught him not to show the slightest anxiety 
in the presence of his associates. His entourage admired the composure 
he displayed at critical moments. That alone contributed greatly to the 
confidence placed in his decisions. Obviously, he was always conscious 
of the many eyes watching him and knew what discouragement he 
would have set in motion if he had lost his composure even for a mo- 
ment. This self-control remained an extraordinary act of will to the last. 
He wrung it from himself in spite of his rapid aging, in spite of illness, 
in spite of MorelTs experiments, and in spite of the ever greater bur- 
dens under which he staggered. His will often seemed to me as heedless 
and crude as that of a six-year-old child whom nothing can discourage 
or tire. But although it was in some ways ridiculous, it also commanded 
respect. 

This phenomenal confidence in victory in a period of repeated de- 
feats cannot, however, be explained on the grounds of his energy alone. 
In Spandau prison, Funk confided to me that the one reason he, Funk, 
was able to deceive the doctors so consistently and credibly about his 
health was that he believed his own lies. He added that this attitude 
had been the basis of Goebbels's propaganda. Similarly, I can only 
explain Hitler s rigid attitude on the grounds that he made himself 
believe in his ultimate victory. In a sense he was worshiping himself. He 
was forever holding up to himself a mirror in which he saw not only 
himself but also the confirmation of his mission by divine Providence. 
His religion was based on the "lucky break" which must necessarily come 
his way; his method was to reinforce himself by autosuggestion. The 
more events drove him into a corner, the more obstinately he opposed 
to them his certainty about the intentions of Fate. Naturally, he also 
soberly understood the military facts. But he transmuted them by his 
own faith and regarded even defeat as a secret guarantee, offered by 
Providence, of the coming victory. Sometimes he could realize the hope- 
lessness of a situation, but he could not be shaken in his expectation that 
at the last moment Fate would suddenly turn the tide in his favor. If there 
was any fundamental insanity in Hitler, it was this unshakable belief in 
his lucky star. He was by nature a religious man, but his capacity for 
belief had been perverted into belief in himself. 13 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 358 

Hitler's obsessive faith inevitably influenced his entourage. One part 
of my consciousness certainly acknowledged that now everything must 
be approaching the end. But despite that, I spoke all the more fre- 
quently—though to be sure I spoke only for my own specific area— of 
"restoration of the situation." Strangely, this confidence existed apart 
from the recognition of unavoidable defeat. 

When on June 24, 1944, I still tried to impart confidence to others 
at an armaments conference in Linz, I ran into something of a stone 
wall. Rereading the text of my speech today, I am horrified by my reck- 
lessness. There was something grotesque about my effort to persuade 
serious men that supreme exertions might yet bring success. At the end 
of my remarks I voiced the conviction that in our field we would over- 
come the impending crisis, that in the coming year we would achieve 
as great an increase in armaments production as we had in the year 
just past. Speaking extemporaneously, I was carried away; I expressed 
hopes which in the light of reality were sheer fantasies. Events were in 
fact to prove that in the next few months we could increase our pro- 
duction. But why was I realistic enough at the same time to be sending 
a series of memoranda to Hitler on the impending, and finally on the 
imminent, end of all our efforts? The latter step was an act of intelli- 
gence, the former of pure faith. The complete separation between the 
two revealed that special kind of derangement with which everyone 
in Hitler s immediate entourage regarded the inevitable end. 

Only the final sentence of my speech touched on the idea of a re- 
sponsibility which went beyond personal loyalty, whether to Hitler or 
to my own associates. What I said may have sounded like a mere flour- 
ish, but I meant something by it: "We shall continue to do our duty 
so that our German people will be preserved." It was, moreover, what 
this group of industrialists wanted to hear. In saying it I was for the 
first time publicly accepting that higher responsibility to which Rohland 
had appealed when he visited me in April. The idea had steadily grown 
stronger in my mind. I was beginning to see that here was a task still 
worth working for. 

But it was clear that I had not convinced the businessmen. After my 
talk, as well as during the succeeding days of the conference, I heard 
many expressions of hopelessness. 

Ten days earlier Hitler had promised that he would address the 
industrialists. Now, after I myself had so signally failed, I hoped more 
than ever that his speech would lift the general morale. 

Before the war Bormann, on Hitler's orders, had built the Hotel 
Platterhof in the vicinity of the Berghof so that the innumerable pil- 
grims to Obersalzberg would have a place to go for refreshment, or 
even the privilege of spending the night in Hitler s proximity. On 
June 26 about a hundred representatives of the armaments industry 



359 ) The War Thrice Lost 

gathered in the coffee room of the Platterhof. During our sessions in 
Linz, I had noticed that their disgruntlement was also partly concerned 
with the increasing interference of the party apparatus in economic 
affairs. Actually, a kind of state socialism seemed to be gaining more 
and more ground, furthered by many of the party functionaries. They 
had already managed to have all plants owned by the state distributed 
among the various party districts and subordinated to their own district 
enterprises. In particular the numerous underground plants, which had 
been equipped and financed by the state, but whose directors, skilled 
workers, and machinery had been provided by private industry, seemed 
destined to fall under state control after the war. 14 Our very system of 
industrial direction in the interests of war production could easily be- 
come the framework for a state-socialist economic order. The result was 
that our organization, the more efficient it became, was itself providing 
the party leaders with the instruments for the doom of private enterprise. 

I had asked Hitler to take these anxieties into consideration. He 
asked me for a few cue phrases for his speech, and I noted down the 
suggestion that he promise the industrialists that they would be helped 
in the critical period to come, and furthermore that they would be pro- 
tected against interference by local party authorities. Finally, I sug- 
gested that he affirm the "inviolability of private property even though 
certain factories may have become state property due to the temporary 
shift to underground quarters." It would reassure his audience im- 
mensely if he were to speak about "a free economy after the war and a 
fundamental rejection of nationalized industry/' 

Hitler made this speech and, by and large, took up these points. 
Yet all the while he was speaking, he sounded as if he were suffering 
from some impediment. He made frequent slips of the tongue, fumbled 
for words, broke off sentences midway, neglected transitions, and some- 
times became confused. The speech was testimony to his frightening 
state of exhaustion. This very day the situation on the invasion front 
had so deteriorated that nothing could any longer prevent the Allies 
from taking Cherbourg, the first big port. That would solve all their 
supply problems and would considerably increase the strength of the 
invading armies. 

First of all, Hitler repudiated all ideological prejudices. Tor there 
can be only one single rule, and this rule, put succinctly, is: That is correct 
which is useful in itself." In saying this he was upholding his own prag- 
matic way of thinking but undermining all his promises to industry. 

Hitler gave free rein to his bent for historical philosophy and vague 
evolutionary theories. In muddled terms, he assured his audience that: 

. . . the creative force not only shapes but also takes what it has shaped 
under its wing and directs it. This is what we generally mean by such phrases 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 360 

as private capital or private property or private possessions. Therefore the 
future will not belong, as the Communist holds, to the communist ideal of 
equality, but on the contrary, the farther humanity moves along the road 
of evolution, the more individualized achievements will be, from which it 
follows that the direction of what has been achieved will best be carried out 
by those who are themselves responsible for the achievements. . . . The basis 
for all real higher development, indeed for the further development of all 
mankind [will therefore be found], in the encouragement of private initiative. 
When this war has been decided by our victory, the private initiative of the 
German economy will enjoy the greatest era in its history. Think of all the 
creative work that will have to be done then! Don't imagine that all I shall 
do is set up a few state construction departments or a few state economic 
departments. . . . And when the great era of German peacetime business 
has dawned again, then I shall have only one interest, to put the greatest 
geniuses in German business to work. ... I am grateful to you that you 
have helped me to meet our [wartime] tasks. But as the expression of my 
highest gratitude I want you to leave here with the assurance that I shall 
show my gratitude again and again and that no German will say that I 
harmed my own program. That is, when I tell you that after this war Ger- 
man business will experience its greatest boom, perhaps of all times, then 
you must take these words as a promise that will one day be redeemed. 

During this uneasy and disordered speech Hitler received scarcely 
any applause. We all felt stunned. Perhaps this lack of response 
prompted him to change course and attempt to frighten the industrial 
leaders by depicting what awaited them if the war were lost: 

There is no doubt that if we were to lose this war, German private busi- 
ness would not survive. Rather, with the destruction of the entire German 
people, business would naturally be wiped out also. Not only because our 
enemies do not want German competition— this is a superficial view— but 
because fundamental matters are involved. We are involved in a struggle 
which will decide between two points of view: Either humanity will be 
thrown back several thousand years to a primitive condition, with mass 
production directed exclusively by the state, or humanity will continue to 
develop through the furthering of private initiative. 

A few minutes later he reverted to this idea: 

If the war were lost, gentlemen, then you would not have to worry 
about shifting [to a peacetime economy]. Then all anyone will have to think 
about is how he himself will accomplish his shift from this world to the here- 
after. Whether he wants to take care of it himself, or let himself be hanged, 
or whether he prefers to starve or to labor in Siberia— these are some of the 
questions which the individual will have to face. 



361 ) The War Thrice Lost 

Hitler had spoken these words somewhat mockingly, certainly with 
a faint undertone of contempt for these "cowardly bourgeois souls." The 
audience understood—which was enough to destroy my hope that this 
speech would spur the business leaders to new efforts. 

Perhaps Hitler had been stirred up by Bormann s presence; per- 
haps warned by him. At any rate, the declaration in favor of a free 
peacetime economy, which is what I had asked of Hitler and what he 
had promised me, 15 had turned out a good deal less precise and un- 
equivocal than I had expected. Still, several sentences in the speech 
were remarkable enough, I thought at the time, to be worth recording 
in our Ministry archives. Hitler, of his own accord, offered to let me have 
the recording of the speech and even asked me to make suggestions 
for editing it. Bormann, however, blocked publication, whereupon I 
reminded Hitler again of his offer. This time he put me off. He wanted 
to edit the text first, he said. 16 



Blunders, Secret Weapons, 
and the SS 



As THE SITUATION DETERIORATED FURTHER, HITLER CLOSED HIS MIND MORE 

and more to any word against his decisions. He proved to be more auto- 
cratic than ever in this crisis. This hardening of his mental arteries had 
crucial consequences in the technical area as well; because of it the most 
valuable of our "secret weapons" was made worthless. That was the 
Me-262, our most modern fighter plane, with two jet engines, a speed of 
over five hundred miles per hour, and a fighting capability far superior to 
any plane the enemy had. 

As early as 1941, while I was still an architect, I had paid a visit to 
the Heinkel aircraft plant in Rostock and heard the deafening noise 
of one of the first jet engines on a testing stand. The designer, Professor 
Ernst Heinkel, was urging that this revolutionary advance be applied 
to aircraft construction. 1 During the armaments congress at the air force 
test site in Rechlin (September 1943) Milch silently handed me a tele- 
gram which had just been brought to him. It contained an order from 
Hitler to halt preparations for large-scale production of the Me-262. We 
decided to circumvent the order. But still the work could not be continued 
on the priority level it should have had. 

Some three months later, on January 7, 1944, Milch and I were 
urgently summoned to headquarters. Hitler had changed his mind, and 
this on the basis of an excerpt from the British press on the success of 
British experiments with jet planes. He was now impatient to have as 

(36*) 



363 ) Blunders, Secret Weapons, and the SS 

many aircraft of this type as we could make in the shortest possible time. 
Since in the meantime Hitler had let everything lapse, we could promise to 
deliver no more than sixty planes a month from July 1944 on - From Jan- 
uary 1945 on, however, we would be able to produce two hundred and 
ten aircraft a month. 2 

In the course of this conference Hitler indicated that he planned to 
use the plane, which was built to be a fighter, as a fast bomber. The air 
force specialists were dismayed, but imagined that their sensible argu- 
ments would prevail. What happened was just the opposite. Hitler obsti- 
nately ordered all weapons on board removed so that the aircraft could 
carry a greater weight of bombs. Jet planes did not have to defend them- 
selves, he maintained, since with their superior speed they could not be 
attacked by enemy fighters. Deeply mistrustful of this new invention, he 
wanted it employed primarily for straight flight at great heights, to spare 
its wings and engines, and wanted the engineers to gear it to a somewhat 
reduced speed to lessen the strain on the still untried system. 3 

The effect of these tiny bombers, which could carry a load of little 
more than a thousand pounds of bombs and had only a primitive bomb- 
sight, was ridiculously insignificant. As fighter planes, on the other hand, 
each one of the jet aircraft would have been able, because of its supe- 
rior performance, to shoot down several of the four-motored American 
bombers which in raid after raid were dropping thousands of tons of 
explosives on German cities. 

At the end of June 1944, Goering and I once more tried to make 
Hitler see these points, but again in vain. Meanwhile air force pilots had 
tried out the new planes and were spoiling to use them against the Ameri- 
can fleets of bombers. But here was one of these moments when Hitler's 
prejudices were insuperable. Planes of this sort, he said, seizing on any 
sophism, because of their speedy turns and rapid shifts of altitude, would 
expose the pilots to far greater physical strains than in the past; and, 
because of their higher speed the planes would be at a disadvantage 
against the slower and therefore more agile enemy fighters. 4 The fact 
that these planes could fly higher than the American escort fighters and 
could attack the relatively clumsy American bomber squadrons at will 
because of their immensely superior speed made no impression at all on 
Hitler. The more we tried to dissuade him from this notion, the more 
stubbornly he held to it. To mollify us somewhat he spoke of someday, 
far in the future, when he would let the aircraft be used, at least par- 
tially, as fighters. 

It was true, of course, that the planes in question existed so far 
only in a few prototypes. Nevertheless, Hitler's order necessarily influ- 
enced long-range military planning, for the General Staff had been count- 
ing on this new type of fighter to bring about a decisive turning point 
in the air war. Desperate as we were over this aspect of the war, everyone 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 364 

who could claim any knowledge of the subject at all put in a word and 
tried to change Hitler s mind. Jodl, Guderian, Model, Sepp Dietrich, and 
of course the leading generals of the air force, persistently took issue 
with Hitler s layman's opinion. But they only brought his anger down 
on their heads, since he took all this as an attack on his military expertise 
and technical intelligence. In the autumn of 1944 he finally and char- 
acteristically brushed aside the whole controversy by flatly forbidding 
any further discussion of this subject. 

When I telephoned General Kreipe, the new chief of staff of the 
air force, to inform him of what I wanted to write to Hitler in my mid- 
September report on the question of jet planes, he strongly advised me 
not even to allude to the matter. At the very mention of the Me-262, 
Hitler was likely to fly off the handle, he said. And I would only be mak- 
ing trouble for him, since Hitler would assume that the air force chief of 
staff had put me up to it. 

In spite of this warning I still felt I had to tell Hitler once more 
that trying to make fighter planes serve as bombers would be pointless 
and, given our present military situation, a grave error. I emphasized that 
this opinion was shared by the pilots and by all the army officers. 5 But 
Hitler did not even discuss my recommendations, and after so many 
vain efforts I simply withdrew from the fray and confined myself to 
worrying over my own work. Actually, questions of how aircraft were to 
be used were no more my business than the choice of what type of plane 
to produce. 

The jet plane was not the only effective new weapon that could have 
been slated for mass production in 1944. We possessed a remote-controlled 
flying bomb, a rocket plane that was even faster than the jet plane, a 
rocket missile that homed on an enemy plane by tracking the heat rays 
from its motors, and a torpedo that reacted to sound and could thus 
pursue and hit a ship fleeing in a zigzag course. Development of a ground- 
to-air missile had been completed. The designer Lippisch had jet planes 
on the drawing board that were far in advance of anything so far known, 
based as they were on the all- wing principle. 

We were literally suffering from an excess of projects in development. 
Had we concentrated on only a few types we would surely have com- 
pleted some of them sooner. At one point the various departments in 
charge of these matters held council and decided not so much to seek 
new ideas in the future as to select from the existing ideas those which we 
were in a position to develop and to push these vigorously. 

Once again it was Hitler who, in spite of all the tactical mistakes of 
the Allies, ordained those very moves which helped the enemy air offen- 
sive in 1944 achieve its successes. After postponing the development of 
the jet fighter and later converting it into a light bomber, Hitler now 
decided to use our big new rockets to retaliate against England. From 



365 ) Blunders, Secret Weapons, and the SS 

the end of July 1943 on tremendous industrial capacity was diverted to 
the huge missile later known as the V-2: a rocket forty-six feet long and 
weighing more than thirteen metric tons. Hitler wanted to have nine 
hundred of these produced monthly. 

The whole notion was absurd. The fleets of enemy bombers in 1944 
were dropping an average of three thousand tons of bombs a day over a 
span of several months. And Hitler wanted to retaliate with thirty rockets 
that would have carried twenty-four tons of explosives to England daily. 
That was equivalent to the bomb load of only twelve Flying Fortresses. 6 

I not only went along with this decision on Hitler's part but also 
supported it. That was probably one of my most serious mistakes. We 
would have done much better to focus our efforts on manufacturing a 
ground-to-air defensive rocket. It had already been developed in 1942, 
under the code name Waterfall, to such a point that mass production 
would soon have been possible, had we utilized the talents of those tech- 
nicians and scientists busy with rocket development at Peenemiinde under 
Wernher von Braun.* 

Approximately twenty-five feet long, the Waterfall rocket was ca- 

* Even aside from Hitler's objections, a rational course of action such as this 
would have been complicated by the fact that Peenemiinde was developing weapons 
for the army, whereas air defense was a matter for the air force. Given the conflict of 
interests and the fierce ambitions of the army and the air force, the army would never 
have allowed its rival to take over the installations it had built up in Peenemiinde. 
This rivalry made it impossible for even research and development to be conducted 
jointly (see footnote on p. 216 in Chapter 16). Project Waterfall could have gone into 
production even earlier had Peenemiinde's full capacity been used in time. As late as 
January 1, 1945, there were 2210 scientists and engineers working on the long-range 
rockets A-4 and A-9, whereas only 220 had been assigned to Waterfall, and 135 to 
another antiaircraft rocket project, Typhoon. 

Professor C. Krauch, the commissioner for chemical production, had sent me a 
detailed memorandum on June 29, 1943, barely two months before our unfortunate 
decision, offering this opinion: 

Those who advocate accelerated development of aerial weapons are proceed- 
ing on the principle that terror is best answered by terror and that rocket attacks 
against England will necessarily lead to a decrease in the missions flown against 
the Reich. Even assuming that the large long-distance rocket were available in un- 
limited quantities, which it so far is not, previous experience suggests that this 
reasoning is unjustified. On the contrary, those elements in England who formerly 
opposed the use of terror-bombing against Germany's civilian population . . . 
have been moved, since our rocket attacks, to urge their government to launch 
massive raids against our densely populated areas. We are still helplessly vulner- 
able to raids of this sort. . . . Such considerations point to the necessity of con- 
centrating heavily on antiaircraft weaponry, on the C-2 device of Waterfall. We 
must be able to deploy it at once and on a large scale. ... In other words, every 
expert, every worker, and every man-hour devoted to the speeding of this program 
will yield results proportionately far more effective for winning the war than the 
same resources invested in any other program. Delaying such a program can 
mean the difference between victory and defeat. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 366 

pable of carrying approximately six hundred and sixty pounds of explo- 
sives along a directional beam up to an altitude of fifty thousand feet 
and hit enemy bombers with great accuracy. It was not affected by day or 
night, by clouds, cold, or fog. Since we were later able to turn out nine 
hundred of the offensive big rockets monthly, we could surely have pro- 
duced several thousand of these smaller and less expensive rockets per 
month. To this day I think that this rocket, in conjunction with the jet 
fighters, would have beaten back the Western Allies' air offensive against 
our industry from the spring of 1944 on. Instead, gigantic effort and 
expense went into developing and manufacturing long-range rockets 
which proved to be, when they were at last ready for use in the autumn 
of 1944, an almost total failure. Our most expensive project was also our 
most foolish one. Those rockets, which were our pride and for a time 
my favorite armaments project, proved to be nothing but a mistaken 
investment. On top of that, they were one of the reasons we lost the 
defensive war in the air. 

Ever since the winter of 1939, 1 had been closely associated with the 
Peenemunde development center, although at first all I was doing was 
meeting its construction needs. I liked mingling with this circle of non- 
political young scientists and inventors headed by Wernher von Braun— 
twenty-seven years old, purposeful, a man realistically at home in the 
future. It was extraordinary that so young and untried a team should 
be allowed to pursue a project costing hundreds of millions of marks 
and whose realization seemed far away. Under the somewhat pater- 
nalistic direction of Colonel Walter Dornberger these young men were 
able to work unhampered by bureaucratic obstacles and pursue ideas 
which at times sounded thoroughly Utopian. 

The work, mere glimmerings of which were being sketched out in 
1939? also exerted a strange fascination upon me. It was like the plan- 
ning of a miracle. I was impressed anew by these technicians with their 
fantastic visions, these mathematical romantics. Whenever I visited Peene- 
munde I also felt, quite spontaneously, somehow akin to them. My sym- 
pathy stood them in good stead when in the late fall of 1939 Hitler 
crossed the rocket project off his list of urgent undertakings and thus 
automatically cut off its labor and materials. By tacit agreement with 
the Army Ordnance Office, I continued to build the Peenemunde instal- 
lations without its approval— a liberty that probably no one but myself 
could have taken. 

After my appointment as Minister of Armaments, I naturally took a 
keener interest in this great project. Hitler, however, continued to be 
exceedingly skeptical. He was filled with a fundamental distrust of all 
innovations which, as in the case of jet aircraft or atom bombs, went 
beyond the technical experience of the First World War generation and 
presaged an era he could not know. 



367 ) Blunders, Secret Weapons, and the SS 

On June 13, 1942, the armaments chiefs of the three branches of the 
armed forces, Field Marshal Milch, Admiral Witzell, and General Fromm, 
flew to Peenemiinde with me to witness the first firing of a remote- 
controlled rocket. Before us in a clearing among the pines towered an 
unreal-looking missile four stories high. Colonel Dornberger, Wernher 
von Braun, and the staff were as full of suspense over this first launching 
as we were. I knew what hopes the young inventor was placing on this 
experiment. For him and his team this was not the development of a 
weapon, but a step into the future of technology. 

Wisps of vapor showed that the fuel tanks were being filled. At the 
predetermined second, at first with a faltering motion but then with the 
roar of an unleashed giant, the rocket rose slowly from its pad, seemed to 
stand upon its jet of flame for the fraction of a second, then vanished with 
a howl into the low clouds. Wernher von Braun was beaming. For my 
part, I was thunderstruck at this technical miracle, at its precision and 
at the way it seemed to abolish the laws of gravity, so that thirteen tons 
could be hurtled into the air without any mechanical guidance. 

The technicians were just explaining the incredible distance the 
projectile was covering when, a minute and a half after the start, a rapidly 
swelling howl indicated that the rocket was falling in the immediate 
vicinity. We all froze where we stood. It struck the ground only a half 
a mile away. The guidance system had failed, as we later learned. Never- 
theless the technicians were satisfied, since the thorniest problem had 
been solved: getting it off the ground. Hitler, however, continued to 
have the "gravest doubts" and wondered whether a guidance capability 
could ever be developed. 7 

On October 14, 1942, 1 was able to inform him that his doubts could 
be over. The second rocket had successfully flown the prescribed course 
of one hundred and twenty miles and had struck within two and a half 
miles of the target. For the first time a product of man's inventive mind 
had grazed the frontiers of space at an altitude of sixty miles. It seemed 
like the first step toward a dream. Only at this point did Hitler, too, 
show lively interest. As usual, his desires underwent instant inflation. He 
insisted that before the rocket was put into action a flock of five thou- 
sand missiles was to be ready, "available for wholesale commitment."* 

I now had to make arrangements for mass production. On Decem- 
ber 22, 1942, 1 had Hitler sign an order to this effect, although the rocket 
still needed considerable development before it could lend itself to mass 
manufacture. 8 I thought I could risk rushing matters in this way. Based 
on the progress already made and the promises from Peenemiinde, the 



* See FuhrerprotokoU, October 13-14, 1942, Point 25. Even 5000 long-range 
rockets, that is more than five months' production, would have delivered only 3750 
tons of explosives; a single attack by the combined British and American air forces 
delivered a good 8000 tons. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 368 

final technical data was to be available by July 1943, at which point we 
could go right into production. 

On the morning of July 7, 1943, 1 invited Dornberger and von Braun 
to headquarters at Hitler's request. The Fuehrer wanted to be informed 
on the details of the V-2 project. After Hitler had finished with one of 
his conferences, we went together over to the movie hall, where some of 
Wernher von Braun s assistants were ready. After a brief introduction 
the room was darkened and a color film shown. For the first time Hitler 
saw the majestic spectacle of a great rocket rising from its pad and dis- 
appearing into the stratosphere. Without a trace of timidity and with a 
boyish sounding enthusiasm, von Braun explained his theory. There could 
be no question about it: From that moment on, Hitler had been finally 
won over. Dornberger explained a number of organizational questions, 
while I proposed to Hitler that von Braun be appointed a professor. "Yes, 
arrange that at once with Meissner," Hitler said impulsively. Til even 
sign the document in person." 

Hitler bade the Peenemunde men an exceedingly cordial good-by. He 
was greatly impressed, and his imagination had been kindled. Back in 
his bunker he became quite ecstatic about the possibilities of this project. 
"The A-4 is a measure that can decide the war. And what encouragement 
to the home front when we attack the English with it! This is the decisive 
weapon of the war, and what is more it can be produced with relatively 
small resources. Speer, you must push the A-4 as hard as you can! What- 
ever labor and materials they need must be supplied instantly. You know 
I was going to sign the decree for the tank program. But my conclusion 
now is: Change it around and phrase it so that A-4 is put on a par with 
tank production. But," Hitler added in conclusion, "in this project we can 
use only Germans. God help us if the enemy finds out about the business." 

There was only one point on which he pressed me, when we were 
alone again. "Weren't you mistaken? You say this young man is thirty- 
one? I would have thought him even younger!" He thought it astonish- 
ing that so young a man could already have helped to bring about a 
technical breakthrough which would change the face of the future. From 
then on he would sometimes expatiate on his thesis that in our century 
people squandered the best years of their lives on useless things. In past 
eras an Alexander the Great had conquered a vast empire at the age of 
twenty-three and Napoleon had won his brilliant victories at thirty. In 
connection with this he would often allude, as if casually, to Wernher 
von Braun, who at so young an age had created a technical marvel at 
Peenemunde. 

In the autumn of 1943 it turned out that our expectations had been 
premature. The final blueprints had not been delivered in July, as prom- 
ised, so that we were not able to go into mass production immediately. A 
great many sources of error had been discovered. In particular, when 



369 ) Blunders, Secret Weapons, and the SS 

the first rockets with warheads were fired, there were inexplicable pre- 
mature explosions when the missile reentered the atmosphere. 10 There 
were still many questions unsolved, I warned in a speech on October 6, 
1943, so that it would be premature "to count with certainty on this new 
weapon." I added that the technical difference between individual manu- 
facture and mass production, considerable enough in itself, would involve 
special difficulties in the case of these highly complicated mechanisms. 
Almost a year passed. At the beginning of September 1944 *^ e A* 8 * 
rockets were fired at England. Not, as Hitler had imagined, five thousand 
at one blow, but twenty-five, and then not at one blow but over a period 
of ten days. 

After Hitler had become excited over the V-2 project, Himmler en- 
tered the picture. Six weeks later he came to Hitler to propose the simplest 
way to guarantee secrecy for this vital program. If the entire work force 
were concentration camp prisoners, all contact with the outside world 
would be eliminated. Such prisoners did not even have any mail, Himmler 
said. Along with this, he offered to provide all necessary technicians 
from the ranks of the prisoners. All industry would have to furnish would 
be the management and the engineers. 

Hitler agreed to this plan. And Saur and I had no choice, especially 
since we could not offer a more persuasive arrangement. 11 

The result was that we had to work out guidelines for a joint under- 
taking with the SS leadership— what was to be called the Central Works. 
My assistants went into it reluctantly, and their fears were soon con- 
firmed. Formally speaking, we remained in charge of the manufacturing; 
but in cases of doubt we had to yield to the superior power of the 
SS leadership. Thus, Himmler had put a foot in our door, and we our- 
selves had helped him do it. 

Himmler had conferred an honorary rank in the SS upon almost 
every government minister whose personal or political weight he had to 
reckon with. He had reserved a particularly high distinction for me; he 
wanted to make me an SS Oberstgruppenfiihrer, a rank corresponding to 
that of a full general in the army and one very rarely conferred. But 
although he let me know how unusual the honor was, I refused his offer 
with polite phrases. I pointed out that the army 12 as well as the SA and 
the NSKK had in vain offered me high titular ranks. In order to make my 
refusal sound less challenging, I volunteered to reactivate my former ordi- 
nary membership in the Mannheim SS— not suspecting that I had not even 
been listed as a member there. 

By conferring such ranks Himmler of course meant to gain influence 
and thrust his way into areas not yet under his command. My suspicions 
proved only too justified: Himmler promptly made every effort to push 
his way into the field of armaments production. He readily offered count- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 370 

less prisoners and as early as 1942 began placing pressure on a number 
of my assistants. As far as we could make out, he wanted to turn the 
concentration camps into large modern factories, especially for armaments, 
with the SS continuing to have direct control of them. General Fromm 
at the time called my attention to the perils of this for orderly produc- 
tion of armaments, and Hitler made it clear he was on my side. After 
all, we had had certain dismal experiences before the war with such 
SS projects, which had promised us bricks and granite. On September 
21, 1942, Hitler ruled on the matter. The prisoners were to work in 
factories under the direction of the industrial armaments organization. 
Himmler's expansionist drive had been curbed for the present, at least 
in this field. 13 

At first the factory managers complained that the prisoners arrived in 
a weakened condition and after a few months had to be sent back, ex- 
hausted, to the regular camps. Since their training time alone required 
several weeks and instructors were scarce, we could not afford to train 
a new group every few months. In response to our complaints the SS 
made considerable improvements in the sanitary conditions and rations 
of the camps. Soon, in the course of my rounds through the armaments 
plants, I saw more contented faces among the prisoners and better fed 
people. 14 

Our hard-won independence in matters of armaments was broken 
by Hitler's order to erect a large rocket-production plant dependent on 
the SS. 

In a lonely valley in the Harz Mountains a widely ramified system 
of caves had been established before the war for the storage of vital 
military chemicals. Here, on December 10, 1943, 1 inspected the extensive 
underground installations where the V-2 was to be produced. In enor- 
mous long halls prisoners were busy setting up machinery and shifting 
plumbing. Expressionlessly, they looked right through me, mechanically 
removing their prisoners' caps of blue twill until our group had passed 
them. 

I cannot forget a professor of the Pasteur Institute in Paris who 
testified as a witness at the Nuremberg Trial. He too was in the Central 
Works which I inspected that day. Objectively, without any dramatics, 
he explained the inhuman conditions in this inhuman factory. The mem- 
ory is especially painful, the more so because he made his charge without 
hatred, sadly and brokenly and also astonished at so much human de- 
generacy. 

The conditions for these prisoners were in fact barbarous, and a 
sense of profound involvement and personal guilt seizes me whenever 
I think of them. As I learned from the overseers after the inspection 
was over, the sanitary conditions were inadequate, disease rampant; the 
prisoners were quartered right there in the damp caves, and as a result 



371 ) Blunders, Secret Weapons, and the SS 

the mortality among them was extraordinarily high.* That same day 
I allocated the necessary materials and set all the machinery in motion 
to build a barracks camp immediately on an adjacent hill. In addition, 
I pressed the SS camp command to take all necessary measures to im- 
prove sanitary conditions and upgrade the food. They pledged that they 
would do so. 

Up to this time I had actually paid almost no attention to these 
problems, and the assurances of the camp commanders persuaded me 
that matters would be corrected. I did not take action again until Jan- 
uary 14, 1944. O n January 13, Dr. Poschmann, the medical supervisor 
for all the departments in my Ministry, described the hygienic conditions 
at the Central Works in the blackest colors. The next day I sent one of 
my department heads to the plant. 15 Simultaneously, Dr. Poschmann 
started taking various medical measures. A few days later my own illness 
partially put a halt to these actions. But on May 26, soon after I was 
back at my post, Dr. Poschmann told me that he had arranged for the 
assignment of civilian doctors to many of the labor camps. But there 
were difficulties. On the same day, I received a rude letter from Robert 
Ley in which he protested against Dr. Poschmanns interference on for- 
mal grounds. Medical treatment in camps was his province, he declared, 
and angrily demanded that I reprimand Dr. Poschmann, forbid him any 
further meddling, and discipline him for the steps he had already taken. 

I answered immediately that I had no reason to meet his demands, 
that on the contrary we had the greatest interest in adequate medical 
treatment for the prisoners. 16 That same day I discussed further medical 
measures with Dr. Poschmann. Since I was making all these arrange- 
ments in cooperation with Dr. Brandt, and since apart from all humani- 
tarian considerations, the rational arguments were on our side, I did 
not give a hang about Ley's reaction. I was confident that Hitler would 
rebuke the party bureaucracy which we had passed over and would 
even make scornful remarks about the bureaucrats. 

I heard no more from Ley. And Himmler himself failed when he 
tried to show me that he could strike as he pleased even against impor- 
tant groups of individuals. On March 14, 1944, he had Wernher von 
Braun and two of his assistants arrested. The official reason, as given 
to the chief of the Central Office, was that these men had violated one 
of my regulations by giving peacetime projects precedence over their 
war-production tasks. Actually von Braun and his staff used to talk 
freely about their speculations, describing how in the distant future 

* The shocking effect the camp had on us is indicated in the deliberately veiled 
phraseology of the Office Journal entry for December 10, 1943: "On the morning of 
December 10 the minister went to inspect a new plant in the Harz Mountains. Carry- 
ing out this tremendous mission drew on the leaders' last reserves of strength. Some 
of the men were so affected that they had to be forcibly sent off on vacations to re- 
store their nerves." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 372 

a rocket could be developed and used for mail service between the United 
States and Europe. High-spiritedly and naively they indulged in their 
dreams and let a picture magazine prepare all sorts of fantastic drawings 
based on their visions. When Hitler visited me at my sickbed in Klessheim 
and treated me with such surprising benevolence, I took this occasion 
to intercede for the arrested specialists, and had Hitler promise that he 
would get them released. But a week was to pass before this was done, 
and as much as six weeks later Hitler was still grumbling about the 
trouble he had gone to. As he phrased it, von Braun was to be "protected 
from all prosecution as long as he is indispensable, difficult though the 
general consequences arising from the situation ,, were. Actually, Himmler 
had achieved one of his ends. From now on even the top men of the 
rocket staff no longer felt safe from his arbitrary hand. It was conceivable, 
after all, that I might not always be in a position to free them if they 
were arrested again. 

Himmler had long been striving to set up a business firm which 
would be the property of the SS. Hitler, or so it seemed to me, was 
cool to the idea, and I did my best to reinforce him in this. Perhaps this 
conflict was one of the reasons for Himmler's strange conduct during 
my illness. For during those months he had at last managed to persuade 
Hitler that a large-scale SS business enterprise would offer numerous 
advantages. At the beginning of June 1944, Hitler asked me to assist 
the SS in its efforts to build up an economic empire extending from raw 
materials to manufacturing. He had a strange reason, now, for furthering 
this enterprise: The SS must be strong enough so that under his suc- 
cessors it would be able, for example, to oppose a Finance Minister who 
wanted to cut its funds. 

What followed from this was precisely what I had feared at the 
beginning of my work as Minister of Armaments. At least I was able to 
put across the point that Himmler's manufacturing sites "must be subject 
to the same control as the rest of the armaments and war-production 
industry," lest "one part of the armed forces go its own independent 
way when I have managed by great effort over two years to coordinate 
armaments production for the other three branches of the armed forces." 17 
Hitler promised to back me if I had trouble with Himmler, but I had 
great doubts about the strength of such backing. Significantly enough 
Himmler had had a report from Hitler on this conversation at the time 
the Reichsfiihrer-SS asked me to his house near Berchtesgaden. 

It is true that the Reichsfiihrer-SS sometimes seemed to be a visionary 
whose intellectual flights struck even Hitler as ridiculous. But Himmler 
was also a sober-minded realist who knew exactly what his far-reaching 
political aims were. In our discussions he displayed a friendly courtesy 
that seemed slightly forced and never cordial. And he always made a 



373 ) Blunders, Secret Weapons, and the SS 

point of having a witness from his staff present. He had the patience to 
listen to his visitors' arguments— a gift rare in those days. In the discus- 
sion he often seemed petty and pedantic and had apparently thought 
out beforehand everything he wanted to say. He was obviously not 
concerned with the impression this made, that he seemed slow-minded 
let alone of limited intelligence. His office worked with the precision of 
a well-oiled machine— which was probably an expression of his own 
impersonality. At any rate I always felt that his pallid character was 
reflected in the utterly matter-of-fact style of his secretariat. His stenog- 
raphers, all young girls, could certainly not be called pretty, but they 
all seemed to be extremely hard-working and conscientious. 

Himmler presented me with a well-thought-out and wide-ranging 
plan. During my illness the SS, in spite of all Saur's efforts to oppose it, 
had acquired the Hungarian concern of Manfred-Weiss, an important 
armaments company. With this as a core, Himmler explained, he wanted 
systematically to construct a steadily expanding cartel. Would I suggest 
a specialist to help with the construction of this giant enterprise? After 
reflecting briefly, I proposed Paul Pleiger, who had set up large steel 
mills for the Four- Year Plan. Pleiger was an energetic and independent 
man who, with his manifold ties to industry, would be able to ensure 
that Himmler did not expand his concern too vigorously and too un- 
scrupulously. But Himmler did not like my nominee. That was the last 
time he asked me for advice. 

Himmler's close associates Oswald Pohl, Hans Juttner, and Gottlob 
Berger were tough and ruthless in negotiation, but moderately good- 
natured. They had that kind of banality which seems quite tolerable at 
first sight. But two of his other men were surrounded by an aura of 
iciness like that of their chief: Both Reinhard Heydrich and Hans 
Kammler were blond, blue-eyed, long-headed, always neatly dressed, 
and well bred. Both were capable of unexpected decisions at any mo- 
ment, and once they had arrived at them they would carry them through 
with a rare obstinacy. Himmler had made a significant choice in pick- 
ing Kammler as his aide. For in spite of all his ideological crankiness, 
in matters of personnel Himmler was not overly concerned about lengthy 
party membership. He was more interested in such qualities as energy, 
swift intelligence, and extreme zeal. In the spring of 1942, Himmler had 
appointed Kammler, who had previously been a high-ranking con- 
struction employee in the Air Ministry, to head the SS construction 
operations, and in the summer of 1943 he chose him to handle the 
rocket program. In the course of my enforced collaboration with this 
man, I discovered him to be a cold, ruthless schemer, a fanatic in the 
pursuit of a goal, and as carefully calculating as he was unscrupulous. 

Himmler heaped assignments on him and brought him into Hitlers 
presence at every opportunity. Soon rumors were afloat that Himmler 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 374 

was trying to build up Kammler to be my successor. 18 At the time I had 
seen only the best side of Kammler, and I rather liked his objective 
coolness. In many jobs my partner, in his intentions possibly my rival, 
he was in his career as well as his manner of work in many ways my 
mirror image. He too came from a solid middle-class family, had gone 
through the university, had been "discovered" because of his work in 
construction, and had gone far and fast in fields for which he had not 
been trained. 

During the war the supply of labor became the key factor in any 
industrial unit. At the beginning of the forties, and subsequently at 
a faster and faster pace, the SS began secretly building labor camps 
and making sure they were kept full. In a letter of May 7, 1944, Walter 
Schieber, one of my department heads, called my attention to the 
efforts of the SS to use its powers over labor in order to promote its 
economic expansion. Moreover, the SS was casting eyes on the foreign 
workers in our factories and became more and more zealous in arresting 
them for trivial violations of rules and transferring them to its own 
camps.* My assistants estimated that by this technique we were being 
deprived of thirty to forty thousand workers a month during the spring of 

1944- 

At the beginning of June 1944, I protested to Hitler that I could 
not "stand a loss of half a million workers a year. ... all the more so 
because a majority of them were skilled workers trained with considerable 
effort." I said that they simply had to be "returned to their original 
occupations as quickly as possible." Hitler told me to discuss the 
problem with Himmler; he would then make a decision in my favor. 19 
But in defiance of the facts Himmler denied both to me and to Hitler 
that any such practices were being pursued. 

The prisoners themselves, as I sometimes had a chance to observe, 
also feared Himmlers growing economic ambitions. I recall a tour 
through the Linz steelworks in the summer of 1944 where prisoners 
were moving about freely among the other workers. They stood at the 
machines in the lofty workshops, served as helpers to trained workers, 
and talked unconstrainedly with the free workers. It was not the SS 
but army soldiers who were guarding them. When we came upon a 
group of twenty Russians, I had the interpreter ask them whether 
they were satisfied with their treatment. They made gestures of pas- 

* Dr. Schieber states further: "The SS siphons off by now a significant number 
of the many foreign and especially Russian workers who man the armaments plants. 
This drain is caused by the constant growth of the extensive SS economic interests, 
which is being promoted with particular zeal by Obergruppenfuhrer Pohl." At the 
meeting of the Armaments Staff on May 26, 1944, Kammler had boasted that he had 
"simply placed fifty thousand persons in protective custody in order to obtain the 
necessary labor" for the SS enterprises. 



375 ) Blunders, Secret Weapons, and the SS 

sionate assent. Their appearance confirmed what they said. In contrast 
to the people in the caves of the Central Works, who were obviously 
wasting away, these prisoners were well fed. And when I asked them, 
just to make conversation, whether they would prefer to return to 
the regular camp, they gave a start of fright. Their faces expressed 
purest horror. 

But I asked no further questions. Why should I have done so; then- 
expressions told me everything. If I were to try today to probe the 
feelings that stirred me then, if across the span of a lifetime I attempt 
to analyze what I really felt— pity, irritation, embarrassment, or indig- 
nation—it seems to me that the desperate race with time, my obses- 
sional fixation on production and output statistics, blurred all consid- 
erations and feelings of humanity. An American historian has said of 
me that I loved machines more than people. 20 He is not wrong. I 
realize that the sight of suffering people influenced only my emotions, 
but not my conduct. On the plane of feelings only sentimentality 
emerged; in the realm of decisions, on the other hand, I continued to 
be ruled by the principles of utility. In the Nuremberg Trial the in- 
dictment against me was based on the use of prisoners in the armaments 
factories. 

By the court's standard of judgment, which was purely numerical, 
my guilt would have been greater had I prevailed over Himmler and 
raised the number of prisoners in our labor force, thus increasing the 
chances of more people for survival. Paradoxically, I would feel better 
today if in this sense I had been guiltier. But what preys on my mind 
nowadays has little to do with the standards of Nuremberg nor the 
figures on lives I saved or might have saved. For in either case I was 
moving within the system. What disturbs me more is that I failed to 
read the physiognomy of the regime mirrored in the faces of those 
prisoners— the regime whose existence I was so obsessively trying to 
prolong during those weeks and months. I did not see any moral ground 
outside the system where I should have taken my stand. And some- 
times I ask myself who this young man really was, this young man who has 
now become so alien to me, who walked through the workshops of the 
Linz steelworks or descended into the caverns of the Central Works 
twenty-five years ago. 

One day, some time in the summer of 1944, my friend Karl Hanke, 
the Gauleiter of Lower Silesia, came to see me. In earlier years he 
had told me a great deal about the Polish and French campaigns, had 
spoken of the dead and wounded, the pain and agonies, and in talking 
about these things had shown himself a man of sympathy and direct- 
ness. This time, sitting in the green leather easy chair in my office, he 
seemed confused and spoke falteringly, with many breaks. He advised 
me never to accept an invitation to inspect a concentration camp in 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 376 

Upper Silesia. Never, under any circumstances. He had seen some- 
thing there which he was not permitted to describe and moreover 
could not describe. 

I did not query him, I did not query Himmler, I did not query 
Hitler, I did not speak with personal friends. I did not investigate— for 
I did not want to know what was happening there. Hanke must have 
been speaking of Auschwitz. During those few seconds, while Hanke 
was warning me, the whole responsibility had became a reality again. 
Those seconds were uppermost in my mind when I stated to the in- 
ternational court at the Nuremberg Trial that as an important member 
of the leadership of the Reich, I had to share the total responsibility 
for all that had happened. For from that moment on, I was inescapably 
contaminated morally; from fear of discovering something which might 
have made me turn from my course, I had closed my eyes. This deliberate 
blindness outweighs whatever good I may have done or tried to do in 
the last period of the war. Those activities shrink to nothing in the 
face of it. Because I failed at that time, I still feel, to this day, responsible 
for Auschwitz in a wholly personal sense. 



26 

Operation Valkyrie 



Surveying a bombed hydrogenation plant from the air, i was struck 
by the accurate carpet bombing of the Allied bomber fleets. Suddenly 
the thought flashed through my mind that given such precision it should 
be easy for the Allies to destroy all the bridges over the Rhine in a single 
day. I had experts draw the Rhine bridges to scale on aerial photographs 
of bomb holes; they confirmed my fear. Hastily, I had steel girders brought 
to the bridges to be ready for swift repairs. In addition I ordered the 
construction of ten ferries and a pontoon bridge. 1 

On May 29, 1944, ten days later, I wrote to Jodl in some agitation: 

I am tormented by the thought that someday all the bridges over the 
Rhine will be destroyed. According to my observations of the density of the 
bombings recently, it should be possible for the enemy to do this. What 
would the situation be if the enemy, after cutting off all traffic to the armies 
in the occupied western territories, did not carry out his landings at the 
Atlantic Wall, but on the North Sea coast in Germany? Such a landing 
would probably be practicable, since he already possesses absolute air 
superiority which is surely the prime prerequisite for a successful landing 
on the north German coastal area. At any rate his casualties would certainly 
be less by such an approach than by a direct assault on the Atlantic Wall. 

In Germany itself we had scarcely any troop units at our disposal. 
If the airports at Hamburg and firemen could be taken by parachute 

( 377 ) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 378 

units and the ports of these cities be seized by "small forces, invasion 
armies debarking from ships would, I feared, meet no resistance and 
would be occupying Berlin and all of Germany within a few days. 
Meanwhile, the three armies in the West would be cut off by the Rhine, 
and the army groups in the East tied down in heavy defensive battles; 
in any case they were too far away to be able to intervene in time. 

My fears had the same sensational cast as some of Hitler s errant 
notions. The next time I went to Obersalzberg, Jodl said ironically to 
me that he supposed I was now, on top of everything else, becoming an 
armchair strategist. But Hitler was struck by the idea. There is a note 
in Jodl's diary for June 5, 1944: "Skeletal divisions are to be created 
in Germany into which in an emergency the men on leave and the 
convalescents can be pumped. Speer will provide weapons by a crash 
program. There are always three hundred thousand men on furlough 
at home; that means ten to twelve divisions." 2 

Although neither Jodl nor I knew anything about it, the organiza- 
tional framework for this operation had long been in existence. Ever 
since May 1942 a plan known by the code name Valkyrie detailed every 
step for quickly assembling the units and soldiers present in Germany 
in case of domestic disturbances or emergencies. 3 But now Hitler's 
interest in the matter had been aroused, and on June 7, 1944, a special 
conference on it took place at Obersalzberg. In addition to Keitel and 
Fromm, Colonel von Stauffenberg participated in the discussion. 

General Schmundt, Hitler's chief adjutant, had picked Count Stauf- 
fenberg to serve as Fromm's chief of staff and to inject some force into 
the work of the flagging general. As Schmundt explained to me, 
Stauffenberg was considered one of the most dynamic and competent 
officers in the German army. 4 Hitler himself would occasionally urge 
me to work closely and confidentially with Stauffenberg. In spite of 
his war injuries (he had lost an eye, his right hand, and two fingers of 
his left hand), Stauffenberg had preserved a youthful charm; he was 
curiously poetic and at the same time precise, thus showing the marks 
of the two major and seemingly incompatible educational influences 
upon him: the circle around the poet Stefan George and the General 
Staff. He and I would have hit it off even without Schmundt's recom- 
mendation. After the deed which will forever be associated with his 
name, I often reflected upon his personality and found no phrase more 
fitting for him than this one of Holderlins: "An extremely unnatural, 
paradoxical character unless one sees him in the midst of those circum- 
stances which imposed so strict a form upon his gentle spirit." 

There were further sessions of these conferences on July 6 and 8. 
Along with Hitler, Keitel, Fromm, and other officers sat at the round 
table by the big window in the Berghof salon. Stauffenberg had taken 
his seat beside me, with his remarkably plump briefcase. He explained 
the Valkyrie plan for committing the Home Army. Hitler listened at- 



379 ) Operation Valkyrie 

tentively and in the ensuing discussion approved most of the proposals. 
Finally, he decided that in military actions within the Reich the military 
commanders would have full executive powers, the political authorities— 
which meant principally the Gauleiters in their capacity of Reich Defense 
Commissioners— only advisory functions. The military commanders, the 
decree went, could directly issue all requisite instructions to Reich and 
local authorities without consulting the Gauleiters. 5 

Whether by chance or design, at this period most of the prominent 
military members of the conspiracy were assembled in Berchtesgaden. 
As I know now, they and Stauffenberg had decided only a few days 
before to attempt to assassinate Hitler with a bomb kept in readiness 
by Brigadier General Stieff. On July 8, 1 met General Friedrich Olbricht 
to discuss the drafting of deferred workers for the army; up to now 
Keitel and I had been at odds over this question. As so often, Olbricht 
complained again about the difficulties that inevitably arose from the 
armed forces being split into four services. Were it not for the jealousies 
of the different branches, the army could avail itself of hundreds of 
thousands of young soldiers now in the air force, he said. 

The next day, I met Quartermaster General Eduard Wagner at the 
Berchtesgadener Hof , along with General Erich Fellgiebel of the Signal 
Corps, General Fritz Lindemann, aide to the chief of staff, and Briga- 
dier General Helmut Stieff, chief of the Organizational Section in the 
High Command of the Army (OKH). They were all members of the 
conspiracy and none of them was destined to survive the next few 
months. Perhaps because the long-delayed decision to attempt the coup 
d'etat had now been irrevocably taken, they were all in a rather reck- 
less state of mind that afternoon, as men often are after some great 
resolution. My Office Journal records my astonishment at the way they 
belittled the desperate situation at the front: "According to the Quarter- 
master General, the difficulties are minor. . . . The generals treat the 
eastern situation with a superior air, as if it were of no importance." 6 

One or two weeks before, General Wagner had painted that same 
situation in the blackest colors. He had outlined the demands he would 
have to make upon our armaments industries in case of further retreat. 
These were so high that they could not possibly have been met, and 
I am inclined to think today that his only purpose was to show Hitler that 
the army could no longer be provided with weapons and that we there- 
fore were heading straight toward disaster. I was not present at this 
conference and my associate Karl Saur had scolded the much older 
Quartermaster General like a schoolboy, with Hitler joining in. Now, 
I had called on him to demonstrate my unchanged friendliness, only 
to discover that the whole problem did not seem to worry him any 
longer. 

We discussed in detail the wastefulness that sprang from inadequate 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 380 

organization. General Fellgiebel described the squandering of men and 
materials caused solely by the fact that each branch of the armed 
forces maintained a separate communications network. The air force 
and the army, for example, had laid separate cables all the way to Athens 
or Lapland. Aside from all questions of economy, collaboration on such 
projects would promote efficiency. But Hitler would not hear of any 
changes. I myself contributed a few illustrations of the advantages which 
would result from single direction of armaments production for all the 
services. 

Although I had often had unusually frank conversations with the 
conspirators, I did not catch wind of their plans. Only once did I sense 
that something was brewing— but that was not from talking with them. 
It was rather because of a remark of Himmler's. Sometime in the late 
autumn of 1943, he was talking with Hitler in the headquarters area. 
I was standing nearby and thus inadvertently became a witness to this 
conversation. 

"Then you are in agreement, mein Fuhrer, that I am to talk with 
the Gray Eminence and pretend I am willing to go along with them?" 

Hitler nodded. 

"There are some obscure plans afoot. Perhaps, if I can win his 
confidence, I'll learn more about them. But then if you, mein Fuhrer, 
hear about this from some third party, you'll know my motives/' 

Hitler made a gesture of agreement. "Of course, I have every con- 
fidence in you." 

I asked one of the adjutants whether he knew whose nickname was 
"the Gray Eminence." "Oh yes," he replied, "that's Popitz, the Prussian 
Minister of Finance." 

Chance assigned the roles. For a time Fate seemed uncertain 
whether on July 20 I was to be at the center of the uprising in Bendler- 
strasse* or the center of the regime's counterattack, Goebbels's house. 

On July 17, Fromm had his chief of staff, Stauffenberg, ask me to 
come to lunch with him on July 20 in Bendlerstrasse so I could confer 
with him after lunch. Since I had a long-standing appointment late 
that morning to address a group of businessmen and government officials 
on armaments problems, I had to decline. Stauffenberg nevertheless 
repeated the invitation for July 20 more urgently. It was absolutely es- 
sential that I come, he informed me. But I imagined that the morning 
affair would probably take a good deal out of me and could not face a 
conference with Fromm afterward, so I declined once more. 

My address began around eleven o'clock in the impressively ap- 

* The High Command of the Armed Forces was located on Bendlerstrasse, and 
the street name was used as a synonym for the building, just as "Wilhelmstrasse" 
stood for the Chancellery.— Translators' note. 



381 ) Operation Valkyrie 

pointed hall of the Propaganda Ministry which Goebbels had placed 
at my disposal. Some two hundred persons, all the ministers present 
in Berlin, all the state secretaries, and other high officials had come. 
Practically all of political Berlin was assembled there. The audience 
heard me appeal first of all for intensified commitment on the home 
front. This was the pitch I had made so often I could recite it almost 
by heart. Then I went on to explicate a number of graphs showing the 
present state of our armaments. 

Around the time that I ended my talk and Goebbels, as the host, 
spoke a few concluding words, Stauffenberg's bomb exploded at the 
Fuehrer's headquarters in Rastenburg. If the rebels had been more skill- 
ful and taken parallel action immediately, they could have had a lieu- 
tenant with ten men march into this assembly and arrest many important 
members of the Reich government. As it was, an unsuspecting Goebbels 
took Funk and me along into his office in the Ministry. We talked, as 
was our wont of late, about what more might still be done about mobil- 
izing the home front. Suddenly a small loudspeaker reported: "An urgent 
call from headquarters for the Minister. Dr. Dietrich is on the phone." 

Goebbels threw a switch: "Transfer it here." He went over to his 
desk and picked up the receiver: "Dr. Dietrich? Yes? This is Goebbels. 
. . . What! An attempt to assassinate the Fuehrer? Just now? . . . The 
Fuehrer is alive, you say? I see, in the Speer Barracks. Anything more 
known yet? . . . The Fuehrer thinks it may be one of the OT [Todt 
Organization] workers?" 

Dietrich evidently had to be brief; the conversation ended there. 
Operation Valkyrie had begun, the plan for mobilization of the Home 
Army, which the conspirators had incorporated into their action and 
had for months been discussing openly, even with Hitler. 

"That's all I needed," the thought flashed through my mind as 
Goebbels repeated what he had heard and once again mentioned that 
suspicion had fallen on the OT workers. For if this guess proved correct, 
my own position was endangered; Bormann could easily use my re- 
sponsibility for the Todt Organization as a basis for fresh intrigues 
and insinuations. Even now, Goebbels was flaring up at me because I 
could not tell him what security checks we made before assigning OT 
workers to Rastenburg. All I could tell him was that hundreds of workers 
were admitted into Restricted Area I every day to work on the rein- 
forcement of Hitler s bunker, and that for the time being Hitler had 
taken over the barracks which had been put up for me since it had the 
only sizable conference room at headquarters and was also empty during 
my absence. Under such circumstances, Goebbels said, shaking his 
head at such carelessness, it would have been easy for anyone to get 
into what was supposedly the most carefully restricted and secured area 
in the world. "What was the point of all the protective measures!" he 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 382 

tossed off, as if speaking to someone invisible who was to blame for 
it all. 

Soon afterward, Goebbels bade me good-by; both he and I were 
taken up, even in such a time of emergency, with our ministerial rou- 
tines. Colonel Engel, Hitlers former army adjutant who now com- 
manded a frontline unit, was already waiting for me for a late lunch. 
I was interested to hear what he thought of a memorandum in which 
I called for the appointment of a "subdictator," that is, a man armed 
with unusual powers who without regard to questions of prestige would 
be able to cut through the tangled threefold and fourfold organization 
of the Wehrmacht and at last establish clear and effective organiza- 
tional structures. This memorandum had been written days before, and 
it was only by chance that it bore the date July 20. Nevertheless, it 
drew on many ideas which had come up in discussions with the military 
people who were now participants in the uprising.* 

The obvious idea, to telephone the Fuehrers headquarters and 
ask for details, did not occur to me. Probably, I assumed that in view 
of the excitement such an episode had undoubtedly produced, a tele- 
phone call would only be a nuisance. Besides, I felt the awkwardness of 
the suspicion that the assassin might have come from my organization. 
After lunch I went on with my appointments for the day and saw Am- 
bassador Clodius of the Foreign Office, who reported on the "safeguard- 
ing of Rumanian oil." But before the conference was over Goebbels 
telephoned me. 7 

His voice had changed remarkably since the morning; it sounded 
excited and hoarse. "Can you interrupt your work at once? Come over 
here. It's extremely urgent! No, I can't tell you anything on the tele- 
phone/' 

I broke off my meeting with Clodius at once. About five o'clock 
I arrived at Goebbels's residence, which was situated south of the 
Brandenburg Gate. He received me in his second-floor office. Hastily, 
he said: "I've just had word from headquarters that a military putsch 

* In my memorandum of July 20, 1944, I applied the experience I had gained 
from working with industry to the problems of armed forces administration. I also 
drew on knowledge I had acquired in conversations with members of the General 
Staff, such as Olbricht, Stieff, Wagner, and others. I explained that figures were de- 
ceptive since of 10.5 million men conscripted, only 2.3 million ever saw service in the 
field. The German organizational method was based on having as many independent 
units as possible, every one of which was eager to achieve the greatest possible self- 
sufficiency in every area. The memorandum continues: "Thus in the armed forces 
we have set up subdivisions for the three main branches, for the Waffen-SS, for the 
Todt Organization, and for the Labor Service— and these subdivisions are all auton- 
omous. Clothing, food, communications and intelligence, health, supplies, and trans- 
portation are all organized separately, have separate headquarters and are separately 
equipped." The result, I stated, was a waste of manpower and material. 



383 ) Operation Valkyrie C t f0 ^ & & f ° 

is going on throughout the Reich. In this situation I'd like to have you 
with me. I sometimes go at things too hastily. You can balance that out 
by your calm. We must take considered action." 

This bombshell threw me into a state of excitement as great as 
Goebbels's. All at once the conversations I had had with Fromm, Zeitzler, 
and Guderian, with Wagner, Stieff, Fellgiebel, Olbricht, and Lindemann, 
leaped into my mind— along with thoughts of the hopeless situation on 
all the fronts, the successful Allied invasion, the overwhelming power 
of the Red Army, the threatening breakdown in our efforts to supply 
fuel— along with all this came recollection of our frequently bitter criti- 
cism of Hitlers amateurishness, of his absurd decisions, of his constant 
insults to high-ranking officers, of the incessant stream of demotions 
and humiliations. It did not occur to me then, however, that Stauffen- 
berg, Olbricht, Stieff, and their circle might be carrying out the revolt. 
I would rather have attributed such an act to a man of Guderian s 
choleric temperament. 

Goebbels, as I later found out, must by this time have learned that 
suspicion was directed against Stauffenberg. But he said nothing to me 
about that. Nor did he tell me that he had talked with Hitler himself 
on the telephone just before my arrival.* 

While I was ignorant of these strands in the web, I had already 
taken my stand. The fact was that I regarded a putsch in the present 
state of affairs as an utter disaster. I did not perceive the morality of it. 
Goebbels could count on my assistance. 

The office windows looked out on the street. A few minutes after 
my arrival I saw fully equipped soldiers, in steel helmets, hand grenades 
at their belts and submachine guns in their hands, moving toward the 
Brandenburg Gate in small, battle-ready groups. They set up machine 
guns at the gate and stopped all traffic. Meanwhile, two heavily armed 
men went up to the door at the wall along the park and stood guard 
there. I summoned Goebbels. He understood the significance at once, 
vanished into his adjacent bedroom, took a few pills from a box, and put 
them into his coat pocket. "Well, just in case!" he said, with visible 
tension. 

We sent an adjutant to find out what orders these sentries had. 
But we did not learn much. The soldiers at the wall proved to be un- 
communicative. Finally, one of them said curtly: "No one is entering or 
leaving here." 

* It can be assumed that Hitler had told Goebbels which way suspicion was 
pointing. By this time at the Rastenburg headquarters orders had already been issued to 
arrest Stauffenberg. Fromm, too, must have been under suspicion, for by 6 p.m. 
Hitler had dismissed Fromm and named Himmler to succeed him. The fact that 
Goebbels did not take me into his confidence probably indicates that he did not 
entirely trust me. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 384 

The telephone calls Goebbels was making indefatigably in all 
directions provided confusing news. Troops from Potsdam were already 
on the march toward Berlin; garrisons from the provinces were also 
moving up, we heard. In myself, in spite of my spontaneous repudiation 
of the uprising, was a curious feeling of merely being there as a non- 
participant, as if all this hectic activity on the part of a nervous and 
resolute Goebbels did not concern me. At times the situation seemed 
rather hopeless, and Goebbels showed extreme anxiety. But since the 
telephone was still functioning and the radio had not yet broadcast 
any proclamations by the rebels, Goebbels concluded that the other 
side was still uncertain. 

It was incomprehensible that the conspirators failed to stop com- 
munications or to seize them for their own use. Weeks before they had 
worked out a detailed schedule which included the arrest of Goebbels, 
occupation of the Berlin long-distance telephone office, the main tele- 
graph office, the SS communications center, the central post office, the 
major broadcasting facilities around Berlin, and the radio station in 
Charlottenburg. 8 Only a few soldiers would have been needed to break 
into Goebbels's office and arrest the minister without resistance; a few 
revolvers were all the protection and arms we had. Goebbels would 
probably have tried to escape capture by taking the potassium cyanide 
he had in readiness. Thus, the most competent antagonist to the con- 
spirators would have been put out of action. 

Amazingly enough, during these critical hours Goebbels could not 
reach Himmler, who alone possessed reliable units that might have 
suppressed the putsch. Himmler had quite obviously withdrawn, and 
Goebbels was all the more disturbed by that because he could not, try 
though he might, see any apparent motive for such conduct. Several 
times he expressed his distrust of the Reichsfuhrer-SS and Minister of 
the Interior. It has always seemed to me a sign of the uncertainties of 
those few hours that Goebbels could have revealed doubt about the 
reliability of even such a man as Himmler. 

Was Goebbels also suspicious of me when he banished me to an 
adjoining room during a telephone call? He hardly took the trouble 
to conceal his skepticism toward me. Afterward, the thought occurred 
to me that perhaps he had wanted me there with him so that he could 
keep watch on me— all the more so since suspicion was already directed 
toward Stauflfenberg and therefore, inevitably, toward Fromm as his 
superior officer. After all, Goebbels was aware of my friendship with 
Fromm, whom he had long openly referred to as an "enemy of the 
party." 

I also thought of Fromm immediately. When Goebbels sent me out 
of his room, I called the switchboard at Bendlerstrasse and asked for 
Fromm, thinking that I could most easily find out from him what was 
happening. "General Fromm is not available/' I was informed. I did 



385 ) Operation Valkyrie 

not know that at this time he was already locked up in a room at Bendler- 
strasse. "Then connect me with his adjutant." No one answered at the 
adjutant's telephone, I was told. "Then General Olbricht, please." 

Olbricht came to the phone at once. "What is going on, General?" 
I asked him in that joking tone customary between us, which often cut 
through difficult situations. "I have work to do and am being kept here 
at Goebbels's office by soldiers." 

Olbricht apologized. "Sorry, in your case it's a mistake. I'll put 
that right in a moment." He hung up before I could ask any more ques- 
tions. I did not tell Goebbels about this phone call. The tone and the 
content of it suggested an understanding with Olbricht which might 
arouse further mistrust in Goebbels. 

Meanwhile Schach, the deputy Gauleiter of Berlin, entered the 
room where I was waiting. Someone named Hagen had just spoken 
to him and vouched for the National Socialist principles of Major Remer, 
whose battalion had encircled the government quarter. Goebbels's first 
thought was to persuade Remer to come and talk with him. As soon 
as he learned that Remer was willing, Goebbels admitted me to his 
office again. He was sure he could win Remer over to his side and asked 
me to be present. Hitler, he said, had been informed of this impending 
conversation; he was awaiting the results at headquarters and would 
be prepared to talk with the major himself at any time. 

Major Remer entered. Goebbels seemed controlled, but nervous. 
He seemed to sense that everything hung on this, the fate of the uprising, 
and thus his own fate as well. After a few remarkably undramatic minutes, 
it was all over and the putsch lost. 

First, Goebbels reminded the major of his oath to the Fuehrer. 
Remer replied by vowing his loyalty to Hitler and the party. But, he 
added, Hitler was dead. Consequently, he must obey the orders of his 
commander, Major General von Haase. Goebbels retorted with the ring- 
ing words: "The Fuehrer is alive!" Seeing that Remer was at first taken 
aback and then became obviously unsure of himself, Goebbels added 
at once: "He's alive. I spoke to him a few minutes ago. An ambitious 
little clique of generals has begun this military putsch. A filthy trick. 
The filthiest trick in history." 

The news that Hitler was still living was evidently an enormous 
relief to this perplexed young man, recipient of an incomprehensible 
order to cordon off the government quarter. Happy, but still incredulous, 
Remer stared at all of us. Goebbels now pointed out to Remer that this 
was an historic hour, that a tremendous responsibility before history 
rested on his shoulders. Rarely had destiny afforded a single man such 
a chance, Goebbels said; it was up to him whether to use it or throw 
it away. 

You had only to see Remer now to observe the change in him that 
these words produced, to realize that Goebbels had already won. But 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 386 

now the Propaganda Minister played his highest card: "I am going to 
talk to the Fuehrer now, and you can speak with him too. The Fuehrer 
can give you orders that rescind your general's orders, cant he?" 
Goebbels concluded in a faintly sarcastic tone. Then he put through 
the connection to Rastenburg. 

The telephone switchboard in his Ministry had a special line direct 
to the Fuehrers headquarters. Within seconds Hitler was on the phone. 
After a few remarks about the situation Goebbels handed the receiver 
to the major. Remer immediately recognized Hitlers voice, and receiver 
in hand involuntarily snapped to attention. We could hear only the 
repeated phrases: "Jawohl, mein Fuhrer. . . . Jawohll" 

Goebbels then took the receiver back, and Hitler told him what 
had been settled. In place of General Haase, the major had been en- 
trusted with carrying out all the military measures in Berlin. Along with 
this, he was to obey all instructions from Goebbels. 

The uprising had failed, but it had not yet been fully crushed by 
seven o'clock that evening when Goebbels had it announced on the 
radio that an assassination of Hitler had been attempted but that the 
Fuehrer was alive and had already returned to his work. Thus, Goebbels 
took instant advantage of one of the technical aids which the rebels had 
neglected during the hours just past with such dire consequences. 

Goebbels's confidence was possibly excessive; all was thrown into 
question again when he learned shortly afterward that a tank brigade 
had arrived at Fehrbelliner Platz and was refusing to obey Remer's orders. 
General Guderian alone was their commander, they had told Remer, 
and with military terseness had warned him: "Anyone who doesn't 
obey will be shot." Their fighting strength was so superior to Remer's 
battalion that the fate of a good deal more than the next hour or two 
seemed to hang on their attitude. 

In keeping with the general confusion, no one knew definitely 
whether this brigade belonged to the rebels or the government. Both 
Goebbels and Remer thought it likely that Guderian was a participant 
in the putsch. 9 The leader of the brigade was Colonel Bollbrinker. 
Since I knew him well, I tried to reach him by telephone. The message 
I received was reassuring: The tanks had come to crush the rebellion. 

About a hundred and fifty members of the Berlin guards battalion, 
most of them older men, had assembled meanwhile in Goebbels's garden. 
Before the minister went to address them he commented: "Once I 
convince them, we've won the game. Just watch how I handle them!" 
Meanwhile night had fallen; the scene was illuminated only by the light 
falling through an open door to the garden. From Goebbels's very first 
words the men listened with the greatest attention to his basically rather 
insignificant speech. Nevertheless, he put on a show of being extraor- 



387 ) Operation Valkyrie 

dinarily self-assured, very much the victor of the day. Precisely be- 
cause his speech turned familiar platitudes into a personal summons, 
it had a mesmeric effect. Simply by reading the faces of the soldiers, 
I could see the impression Goebbels was making on the men gathered 
in a semicircle around him, and listening, not to commands and threats, 
but to a plea to their long-conditioned loyalty. 

Toward eleven o'clock, Colonel Bollbrinker came into the room 
where Goebbels had installed me. The conspirators had been arrested, 
Bollbrinker said, and back at Bendlerstrasse, Fromm wanted to hold a 
summary court-martial of the lot of them. I realized at once that such 
an act would seriously incriminate Fromm. Moreover, it seemed to me 
that Hitler himself ought to decide what was to be done with the rebels. 
Shortly after midnight I hurriedly drove off to prevent the executions. 
Bollbrinker and Remer sat in my car. In totally blacked-out Berlin 
the Bendlerstrasse headquarters was illuminated by searchlights— an 
unreal and ghostly scene. It also seemed as theatrical as a movie back- 
drop brightly lit inside a dark studio. Long, sharp shadows made the 
building look exceedingly solid and sculptured. 

As I was about to turn into Bendlerstrasse, an SS officer signaled 
to me to stop at the curb on Tiergartenstrasse. Almost unrecognizable 
in the darkness under the trees stood Kaltenbrunner, the Gestapo chief, 
and Skorzeny, the man who had liberated Mussolini, surrounded by 
numerous subordinates. These dark figures looked like phantoms and 
behaved as such. When we greeted them, no one clicked his heels; the 
usual paraded briskness had vanished. Everything seemed muted; even 
the conversation was conducted in lowered voices, as at a funeral. I ex- 
plained to Kaltenbrunner that I had come to stop Fromm's summary 
court-martial. I had rather expected Kaltenbrunner and Skorzeny would 
execrate the army, which they had always regarded as their rival, or at 
any rate gloat over its moral defeat. But both men replied in a fairly 
indifferent tone that whatever happened was primarily the army's busi- 
ness. 'We don't want to get involved and certainly will not interfere. In 
any case, the summary court-martial has probably taken place already." 

Kaltenbrunner informed me that no SS forces would be used to sup- 
press the rebellion or to carry out punishments. He had even forbidden 
his men to enter the Bendlerstrasse headquarters, he said. Any inter- 
ference by the SS would inevitably produce fresh trouble with the army 
and increase the existing tensions. 10 But such tactical considerations, 
product of the moment, proved to be short-lived. Only a few hours later 
the pursuit and persecution of the participating army officers by various 
organs of the SS was in full swing. 

Kaltenbrunner had scarcely finished talking when a massive shadow 
appeared against the brightly illuminated background of the Bendler- 
strasse. In full uniform, all alone, Fromm approached us with leaden 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 388 

steps. I bade good-by to Kaltenbrunner and his followers and emerged 
from the darkness of the trees toward Fromm. "The putsch is finished," 
he began, controlling himself with stern effort. "I have just issued the 
necessary commands to all corps area headquarters. For a time I was 
prevented from exercising my command of the Home Army. They actually 
locked me in a room. My chief of staff, my closest associates!" Indignation 
and a measure of uneasiness were detectable as, his voice growing steadily 
louder, he justified his execution of his staff. "As their appointing author- 
ity, it was my duty to hold a summary court-martial immediately of all 
participants in the rebellion." His voice dropping to a pained murmur, he 
added: "General Olbricht and my chief of staff, Colonel Stauffenberg, 
are no longer living." 

The first thing Fromm wanted to do was to telephone Hitler. In vain 
I asked him to come to my Ministry first. He insisted on seeing Goebbels, 
although he knew as well as I that the Propaganda Minister disliked and 
distrusted him. 

At Goebbels's residence, General Haase, the city commandant of 
Berlin, was already under arrest. In my presence Fromm briefly explained 
the events and asked Goebbels to connect him with Hitler. Goebbels, 
instead of replying, asked Fromm to go into another room; then he put 
through the call to Hitler. At this point, he asked me to leave also. After 
about twenty minutes he came to the door and summoned a guard whom 
he posted in front of Fromm's room. 

It was already after midnight when Himmler, whom nobody had 
been able to locate up to this point, arrived at Goebbels's residence. In 
detail, and before being asked, he justified his absence.* There was a tried 
and true rule for dealing with uprisings, he said. You had to keep away 
from the center and conduct the counteractions from outside. That was 
the proper strategy. 

Goebbels seemed to accept this. He appeared to be in the best of 
humor and gave Himmler a detailed account of the events in which he 
dramatized how he had mastered the situation virtually by himself. "If 
they hadn't been so clumsy! They had an enormous chance. What dolts! 
What childishness! When I think how I would have handled such a 
thing. Why didn't they occupy the radio station and spread the wildest 
lies? Here they put guards in front of my door. But they let me go right 
ahead and telephone the Fuehrer, mobilize everything! They didn't even 
silence my telephone. To hold so many trumps and botch it— what 
beginners!" 

Those military men, he continued, had relied too heavily on the 

* Himmler apparently hesitated to obey Hitler's order, issued at 5 p.m., that he 
return to Berlin. At first Himmler stayed in his headquarters; he did not land in Berlin 
until late in the evening, and then avoided Tempelhof Airfield, choosing an obscure 
landing strip outside the city. 



389 ) Operation Valkyrie 

traditional concept of obedience and had taken it for granted that every 
order would be carried out by the subordinate officers and men. That 
alone had doomed the putsch to failure. For they had forgotten, he 
added with cool self-congratulation, that in recent years the National 
Socialist state had educated the Germans to think politically. "It's simply 
no longer possible nowadays to make them follow the orders of a clique 
of generals like so many puppets." Abruptly, Goebbels stopped. As 
though my presence had become an embarrassment he said: "I have 
several questions to discuss with the Reichsfuhrer alone, my dear Herr 
Speer. Good night." 

On the next day, July 21, the important ministers were invited to the 
Fuehrers headquarters to present their congratulations. Appended to 
my invitation was the request that I bring Dorsch and Saur, my two 
principal assistants, along with me— an unusual request, since all the 
other ministers came without their deputies. At the reception Hitler 
greeted them with pronounced cordiality, whereas he passed by me with 
a careless handshake. Hitler's entourage also behaved with inexplicable 
coolness. As soon as I entered a room, the conversation ceased and 
those in the room left or turned away. Schaub, Hitler's civilian adjutant, 
said meaningfully to me: "Now we know who was behind the assassina- 
tion attempt." Then he walked out on me. I could learn no more. Saur 
and Dorsch were even invited to the afternoon tea in the intimate circle 
without me. Everything was very strange. I was greatly disturbed. 

Keitel, on the other hand, had at last emerged from the clouds which 
had been gathering about him in the past weeks, due to the criticism 
of him by members of the entourage. When he picked himself up out of 
the dust immediately after the explosion and saw Hitler standing there 
relatively uninjured, he had rushed at him, as Hitler now repeatedly 
related, exclaiming: "Mein Fiihrer, you're alive, you're alive!" and ignor- 
ing all convention had wildly embraced him. It was clear that after that 
Hitler would never drop him— he was even more closely than ever at- 
tached to him since Keitel seemed the right person to take harsh ven- 
geance upon the rebels. "Keitel was almost killed himself," Hitler declared. 
"He will show no mercy." 

The next day Hitler was more friendly to me again, and his entourage 
followed his example. Under his chairmanship a conference took place 
in the teahouse with Keitel, Himmler, Bormann, Goebbels, and myself 
participating. Without crediting me with the idea, Hitler had taken 
up what I had urged two weeks before and appointed Goebbels Reich 
Commissioner for Total Mobilization of Resources for War. 11 His escape 
from death had made him more resolute; he was ready to implement 
measures which Goebbels and I had been calling for, for more than a 
year. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 39O 

Hitler then turned to the events of the past several days. He was 
triumphant; now at last the great positive turning point in the war had 
come. The days of treason were over; new and better generals would 
assume the command. Today he had realized, he said, that in trying 
Tukhachevsky, Stalin had taken a decisive step toward successful conduct 
of the war. By liquidating his General Staff, Stalin had made room for 
fresh, vigorous men who did not date back to Tsarist days. He had al- 
ways thought the charges in the 1937 Moscow trials were trumped up, 
he said; but now after the experience of July 20 he wondered whether 
there might not have been something to them. He still had no more 
evidence than before, Hitler continued, but he could no longer exclude 
the possibility of treasonous collaboration between the Russian and the 
German general staffs. 

Everybody agreed. Goebbels poured buckets of scorn and contempt 
upon the generals. When I tried to temper some of this, he snapped 
sharply at me in an unfriendly manner. Hitler listened in silence.* 

The fact that General Fellgiebel, the chief of the Signal Corps, had 
also been a member of the conspiracy, prompted Hitler to an outburst 
in which spite and fury were mingled with a sense of being vindicated: 

Now I know why all my great plans in Russia had to fail in recent 
years. It was all treason! But for those traitors, we would have won long 
ago. Here is my justification before history. Now we will find out whether 
Fellgiebel had a direct wire to Switzerland and passed all my plans on to 
the Russians. He must be interrogated by every means! . . . Once again I 
was right. Who wanted to believe me when I objected to any unification 
of the Wehrmacht leadership! Under one man, the Wehrmacht is a menace! 
Do you still think it was chance that I had so many divisions of the 
Waffen-SS raised? I knew why I had to have that, against all the opposi- 
tion. . . . The Inspector General of the Armored Forces— that was all done 
to split up the army as much as possible. 

Hitler had another outburst of murderous rage against the con- 
spirators. He would "annihilate and exterminate" every one of them, 
he declared. Then the names of men who had opposed him at one time 
or another occurred to him. He now included them in the ranks of the 
conspirators. Schacht had been a saboteur of rearmament, he said. Un- 
fortunately he, Hitler, had always been too soft. He ordered the immedi- 

* On July 23, 1944, Ley wrote an editorial in Angriff which revealed that the 
regime had launched a campaign against the old military aristocracy: "Degenerate to 
their very bones, blue-blooded to the point of idiocy, nauseatingly corrupt, and 
cowardly like all nasty creatures— such is the aristocratic clique which the Jew has 
sicked on National Socialism. . . . We must exterminate this filth, extirpate it root 
and branch. ... It is not enough simply to seize the offensive ... we must ex- 
terminate the entire breed." 



391 ) Operation Valkyrie 

ate arrest of Schacht. "Hess, too, will be mercilessly hanged, just like 
these swine, these criminal officers. He was the one who started it, he 
gave the example of treason." 

After each such eruption Hitler calmed down. With the gratefulness 
of a man who has just survived a great peril, he recapitulated the whole 
story of the assassination attempt and then spoke of the turning point 
it had inaugurated, of the victory which had now again moved within 
reach. Euphorically, he drew new confidence from the failure of the plot, 
and we all too willingly let ourselves be swayed by his optimism. 

Soon afterward the main bunker, whose rebuilding had caused 
Hitler to be in my barracks on the fateful day of July 20, was completed. 
If ever a building can be considered the symbol of a situation, this 
bunker was it. From the outside it looked like an ancient Egyptian tomb. 
It was actually nothing but a great windowless block of concrete, without 
direct ventilation, in cross section a building whose masses of concrete 
far exceeded the usable cubic feet of space. It seemed as if the concrete 
walls sixteen and a half feet thick that surrounded Hitler separated him 
from the outside world in a figurative as well as literal sense, and locked 
him up inside his delusions. 

Chief of Staff Zeitzler had already been dismissed on the night of 
July 20. I took advantage of my stay to pay a farewell visit to him at 
his headquarters nearby. Saur could not be dissuaded from keeping 
me company. During our talk Zeitzler's adjutant, Lieutenant Colonel 
Giinther Smend— who was to be executed a few weeks later— reported 
back. Saur instantly became suspicious: "Did you see the look of under- 
standing with which the two of them greeted each other?" he said to 
me. I reacted with an irritable, "No." Shortly afterward, when Zeitzler 
and I were alone, I learned that Smend had just come from Berchtesgaden, 
where he had cleaned out the General Staff's safe. But the very fact 
that Zeitzler commented so innocently on this strengthened my impres- 
sion that the conspirators had not taken him into their confidence. I never 
found out whether Saur gave Hitler a detailed report on this meeting. 
After three days in the Fuehrer's headquarters, I flew back to Berlin 
early on the morning of July 24. 

SS Obergruppenfuhrer Kaltenbrunner, the Gestapo chief, had an- 
nounced his impending arrival. He had never called on me before. I 
received him lying down, since my leg was once again troubling me. 
I had the impression that Kaltenbrunner was scrutinizing me sharply; he 
had that air of cordial menace I had noticed in him on the night of 
July 20. Without preface he began: "In the safe at the Bendlerstrasse 
we have found papers relating to the government the July 20 men in- 
tended to set up. You are down on the list as Armaments Minister." 

He asked whether and what I had known about the position intended 
for me, but otherwise remained formal and polite as usual. Perhaps such 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 3Q2 

an expression of consternation had flashed across my face when he 
made his revelation that he was ready to believe me. He soon stopped 
making any further inquiries and instead took a document from his pocket. 
It was an organizational plan for the postconspiracy government. Ap- 
parently it had been drawn up by a military officer, for the organization 
of the Wehrmacht was treated with particular care. A "Great General 
Staff" was to coordinate the three branches of the armed forces. Subor- 
dinate to it was the Commander in Chief of the Home Army, who was 
also to be supreme Armaments Chief. Next to that, in the midst of the 
many other small boxes, neatly printed in block letters, I found the 
legend: "Armaments: Speer." In pencil a skeptic had written alongside: 
"If possible"— and added a question mark. That unknown officer, and 
the fact that I had not accepted the invitation to the Bendlerstrasse on 
July 20, saved my life. Curiously, Hitler never said a word about it to me. 
Naturally, I considered at the time what I would have done had 
the July 20 insurrection succeeded and the conspirators asked me to 
continue in my post. I probably would have complied for a transitional 
period, but not without considerable inner conflict. Judging by all I 
know today about the individuals and the motives of the conspiracy, 
collaboration with them would within a short time have cured me of my 
loyalty to Hitler. They would quickly have won me over to their cause. 
But that in itself would have made my remaining in the government, 
doubtful enough for superficial reasons, quite impossible for psychological 
reasons. For if I had come to a moral understanding of the nature of 
the regime and of the part that I had played in it, I would have been 
forced to recognize that it was no longer conceivable for me to hold any 
position of leadership in a post-Hitler Germany. 

The next day our Ministry, like all the others, held a loyalty meeting 
in our conference hall. The whole affair lasted no longer than twenty 
minutes. I delivered the feeblest and most insecure speech I had ever 
made. As a rule I had steered clear of the usual formulas, but this time 
I bellowed out our faith in Hitler and his greatness and for the first 
time in my life ended a speech with "Sieg Hell!" Previously, I had not felt 
any need for such Byzantine turns of phrase; they ran contrary both 
to my temperament and my pride. But now I felt insecure, compromised, 
and involved in mysterious, opaque processes. 

* This organization plan conformed largely to the draft found in the Bendler- 
strasse of a decree which Regent Beck was supposed to sign; it established "the pro- 
visional wartime leadership structure." In addition there was a list of ministers; the 
Armaments Ministry was to be placed under Goerdeler, the future Chancellor. I was 
included in this list, also with a question mark after my name and the notation that 
I should not be asked until after the coup had succeeded. (From Der 20, Juli, ed. 
Hans Royce [Berto Verlag, Bonn, 1961].) 



393 ) Operation Valkyrie 

My fears, incidentally, were not unfounded. Rumors had it that I 
had been arrested; other rumors reported that I had already been exe- 
cuted—a sign that public opinion, which still existed only beneath the 
surface, considered my position as imperiled. 12 

All my worries were wiped out, however, when Bormann sent me a 
request to address a conference of Gauleiters in Posen on the subject of 
armaments again. The July 20 events still hung over the group, and 
although I was officially rehabilitated by this invitation, I encountered 
an icy air of prejudice. I found myself entirely alone among all these 
assembled party bigwigs. Nothing could have better characterized the 
atmosphere than a remark that Goebbels made to the Gauleiters and 
Reichsleiters around him before my talk: "Now we at last know where 
Speer stands." 13 

As it happened, however, in July 1944 our armaments production 
had reached its peak. In order not to provoke the party leaders again 
and worsen my situation, I cautiously refrained from any general re- 
marks and instead showered them with a cloudburst of statistics on the 
successes of our previous work and on the new programs Hitler had 
assigned to us. From the overfulfilled quotas, even the party leaders must 
have seen that I and my apparatus were indispensable at this of all times. 
I noticed that the atmosphere warmed considerably when I demon- 
strated, with many examples, what huge stocks of spare parts and ac- 
cessories the Wehrmacht still had and was not using. Goebbels cried 
out loudly, "Sabotage, sabotage!" proving how determined the leadership 
was since July 20 to see treason, conspiracy, and treachery at work 
everywhere. The Gauleiters could not help being impressed by my 
progress report. 

From Posen the participants in this meeting went to headquarters, 
where Hitler addressed them the next day. Although by rank I did not 
belong to this group, 14 Hitler had explicitly invited me to be present. 
I took a seat in the back row. 

Hitler spoke of the consequences of July 20. Once again he attrib- 
uted the bad record of the past years to treason by army officers and 
expressed great hopes for the future. Never before in his life had he felt 
such confidence, said Hitler. 15 For all his previous efforts had been sabo- 
taged, but now the criminal clique had been exposed and purged. In 
the end this putsch may well have been the most fortunate of events 
for our future. Thus Hitler repeated almost word for word what he had 
already said to his intimates immediately after the putsch. I too was 
falling under the spell of his self-confidence, for all its lapses of logic, 
when he dropped a sentence that suddenly startled me out of my trance: 
"If the German nation is now defeated in this struggle, it has been too 
weak. That will mean it has not withstood the test of history and was 
destined for nothing but doom." 16 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 394 

Surprisingly and quite contrary to his usual way of not especially 
heaping praise on his assistants, Hitler pointed to my work and my 
achievements. Probably he knew or sensed that this was necessary. 
Because of the unfriendly attitude of the Gauleiters, I had to be given a 
special boost to make it possible for me to go on working successfully. 
He made it emphatically clear to the party audience that his relations to 
me had not cooled since July 20. 

I utilized my newly strengthened position to help acquaintances and 
associates who had been caught in the wave of persecution following 
the events of July 20.* Saur, on the other hand, denounced two officers 
of the Army Ordnance Office, General Schneider and Colonel Fichtner, 
whose arrests Hitler ordered at once. In Schneider's case, Saur had 
merely quoted a remark of his to the effect that Hitler was incapable 
of judging technical questions. Fichtners arrest was based solely on 
his not having supported vigorously the new types of tanks that Hitler 
wanted at the beginning of the war. This was now interpreted as de- 
liberate sabotage. Still, Hitler was sufficiently tractable at this point so 
that when I interceded for the two officers he agreed to their release, 
though on the condition that they no longer be employed in the Army 
Ordnance Office. 17 

On August 18 at headquarters I observed the curious state of mind 
Hitler was now in concerning the reliability of the officer corps. Field 
Marshal Kluge, the Commander in Chief in the West, had set out on a 
trip to visit the Seventh Army three days before, and could not be reached 
for many hours. When the report came that the Field Marshal, accom- 
panied only by his adjutant who had a radio transmitter with him, had 
approached close to the front, Hitler began to make more and more 
detailed surmises. Soon he had decided that Kluge must have gone to a 
predetermined place in order to conduct negotiations with the Western 
Allies on a capitulation of the German army in the West. And when no 
such negotiations occurred, he reasoned that this was only because an 
air raid had interrupted the Field Marshal's trip and frustrated his 
treasonous intentions. By the time I arrived at headquarters Kluge had 
already been relieved of his command and ordered to headquarters. 
The next report to arrive was that the Field Marshal had succumbed to 
a heart attack on the way. Hitler, invoking his famous sixth sense, ordered 
the Gestapo to examine the corpse thoroughly. He was triumphant when 
it turned out that Kluge's death had been caused by poison. Now he 

* As Gregor Janssen explains in Das Ministerium Speer, I used my influence to 
have several persons released, among them General Speidel, the publisher Suhrkamp, 
the wife of General Seydlitz and his brother-in-law, Dr. Eberhardt Barth. I also 
helped Count Schwerin, General Zeitzler, General Heinrici, and the industrialists 
Vogler, Bucher, Meyer, Stinnes, Haniel, Reuter, Meinen, and Reusch, who were im- 
plicated through Goerdeler. 



395 ) Operation Valkyrie 

was completely convinced that Kluge had been engaged in treasonous 
activities, although the Field Marshal had left a letter assuring him of 
his loyalty unto death. 

During this stay at headquarters I came across the reports of Kalten- 
brunner's interrogations lying on the big map table in Hitler s bunker. 
One of the adjutants who was friendly to me let me have them to read 
for two nights straight, for I still felt far from safe. Many things I had 
said before July 20, which could all along have passed for justified 
criticism, seemed in retrospect incriminating. But none of the arrested 
men had in fact incriminated me. The one thing the rebels had done 
was to adopt my favorite phrase for the yes-men in Hitlers entourage: 
"nodding donkeys." 

During these days a heap of photographs also lay on this table. 
Lost in thought, I picked one up, but quickly put it down. It was a 
picture of a hanged man in convict dress, a broad, colored stripe on 
his trousers. One of the SS leaders standing near me remarked, in ex- 
planation: "That's Witzleben. Don't you want to see the others too? 
These are all photos of the executions." 

That evening the film of the execution of the conspirators was shown 
in the movie room. I could not and would not see it. But in order not to 
attract attention, I gave the excuse that I was far behind in my work. 
I saw many others going to this showing, mostly lower-ranking SS men 
and civilians. Not a single officer of the Wehrmacht attended. 



27 

The Wave from the West 



When at the beginning of july, i had proposed to hitler that 
Goebbels instead of the incompetent Committee of Three take over 
the job of rallying all the forces of the home front behind the war 
effort, I could not foresee that a few weeks later the balance of power 
between Goebbels and me would shift very much against me. This was 
largely because the conspirators had my name down on their list of 
candidates. But, more and more of the party leaders argued that things 
had gone wrong because not enough scope had been given to party 
elements. If the party had had its way, it would have even provided 
the generals. The Gauleiters openly bewailed the fact that in 1934 the 
SA had succumbed to the Wehrmacht. They now regarded Roehm's 
bygone efforts to form a people's army as a missed opportunity. Such 
an army would have bred an officer corps imbued with the National 
Socialist spirit, they argued; and it was the lack of just this spirit that 
had produced the defeats of recent years. The party thought that it 
was high time it took over at least in the civilian sector and energetically 
issued its orders to the government and all the rest of us. 

Only a week after the Gauleiter meeting in Posen, Arthur Tix, the 
head of my Ordnance Directive Committee, informed me that "Gau- 
leiters, SA leaders, and other party authorities were suddenly, without 
previous consultation," trying to interfere with the work of the factories. 
Three weeks later, as a result of inroads by the party, "a double line 

(396) 



397 ) The Wave from the West 

of command" had arisen. The armaments bureaus were "having to 
yield to pressure from the Gauleiters; their arbitrary interference is 
creating a confusion that stinks to heaven." 1 

All this ambition and enterprise on the part of the Gauleiters was 
encouraged by Goebbels, who was suddenly feeling himself not so 
much a government minister as a party leader. Supported by Bormann 
and Keitel, he was preparing large-scale call-ups to the services. Such 
ill-considered intervention would only mean major disruption in the 
factories. On August 30, 1944, I informed the heads of my departments 
of my intention to make the Gauleiters responsible for armaments 
production. 2 I was going to capitulate. 

I was driven to this because I no longer had any support behind 
me. As had long been the case for the majority of the ministers, I 
could not go to Hitler with any such concerns, especially if they in- 
volved the party. As soon as a conversation took a troublesome turn, 
Hitler became evasive. It had become more sensible to communicate 
my complaints to him in writing. 

On September 20, 1 wrote Hitler a lengthy letter in which I candidly 
described the party's ill-feeling toward me, its efforts to eliminate me 
or at any rate by-pass me, its accusations and bullying tactics. 

The events of July 20, I wrote, had "magnified the existing distrust 
of the reliability of the many men from industry who constituted my 
group of associates." The party clung to the notion that my closest 
aides were "reactionary, tied down to one-sided economic views, and 
alien to the party." Goebbels and Bormann had frankly expressed their 
view that my Ministry and my organization for industrial self-respon- 
sibility were "a collection of reactionary captains of industry," if not 
outright "antiparty." I would not, I said, "feel strong enough to carry 
out the technical work assigned to me and my associates unhampered 
and with any promise of success if it were going to be evaluated by 
the standards of party policy." 3 

Only on two conditions, the letter continued, would I allow the 
party a voice in armaments matters: If both the Gauleiters and Bor- 
mann's economic representatives in the districts (Gau economic ad- 
visers) were directly subordinated to me on questions of armaments. 
There must be, I insisted, "clarity in the chain of command and on 
matters of jurisdiction." 4 In addition I demanded that Hitler once again 
approve my principles: "A plain decision is needed whether industry 
is to be guided by industrial self-responsibility built on confidence in 
the factory managers or by a different system. In my opinion respon- 
sibility of the factory managers for their plants must be preserved and 
emphasized as strongly as possible." I concluded this letter by urging 
that a system which had proved itself in practice ought not to be 
changed— but that one way or another we had to have a decision "which 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 398 

will plainly indicate what direction the guidance of the economy is to 
take in the future." 

On September 21, I handed Hitler my letter at headquarters. He 
received it without a word and looked through it. Then, still without 
replying, he pressed the signal button and handed the document to his 
adjutant, telling him to pass it on to Bormann. Goebbels was present 
at headquarters also, and Hitler explained that Goebbels and Bormann 
would decide together what to do. I had lost for good. Hitler had 
evidently grown weary of intervening in these disputes, which made 
little sense to him. 

A few hours later Bormann asked me to his office, which was a 
few steps from Hitler s bunker. He was in shirtsleeves and wore sus- 
penders over his fat trunk; Goebbels was carefully dressed. Citing 
Hitler s decree of July 25, Goebbels flatly declared that he would now 
make full use of his new powers to command me. Bormann agreed: 
I was under Goebbels now. For the rest, he would not stand for any 
further attempts on my part to influence Hitler directly. Bormann told 
me off in his usual loutish fashion, while Goebbels listened menacingly, 
making cynical interjections. The unification I had so often demanded 
had come into being at last, although in the surprising form of an 
alliance between Goebbels and Bormann. 

Hitler continued to say nothing about my written demands, but 
two days later he gave me another sign of his sympathy by signing 
a proclamation of mine to the factory directors. This could be con- 
strued as support of the principle I had set forth in my letter. Under 
normal circumstances it would have constituted a victory over Bormann 
and Goebbels. But Hitler's authority in the party was no longer what 
it had been. His closest paladins simply ignored it or went counter to 
Hitler s pronouncements whenever they wished to tamper with the 
economy. These were the first clear signs of disintegration; now the 
party apparatus and the loyalty of Hitler s leading men had been af- 
fected. The conflict, which continued to smolder during the following 
weeks and grew increasingly violent, intensified these symptoms. 5 Nat- 
urally, Hitler himself was partly to blame for this loss of sovereignty. 
He stood helplessly between Goebbels's demands for more soldiers 
and mine for increased armaments production. First he backed one of 
us, then the other, nodding assent to contradictory commands— until 
the bombs and the advancing enemy armies made both, one and then 
the other, wholly superfluous, finally wiping out the quarrel and the 
question of Hitler s authority. 

Harried both by politics and the external enemy, I was always 
glad to get away from Berlin. I soon began undertaking longer and 



399 ) The Wave from the West 

longer visits to the front. As far as armaments went, it was little help, 
for the experiences I gathered could no longer be put to use. But still 
I hoped by the observations I made and the information I received 
from the commanders to be able occasionally to influence decisions at 
headquarters. 

Later on, when I took account of the results, I had to recognize 
that all my reports, whether oral or written, had had no useful effect. 
For example, many of the generals in command of forward sectors, 
with whom I talked, asked to have their old forces replenished and 
fitted out with arms and tanks which our factories were still supplying. 
Hitler, however, and Himmler, his new commander of the Reserve 
Army, now thought that troops thrown back by the enemy no longer 
possessed the morale to resist and that it was better to hastily set up new 
units, the so-called people's grenadier divisions. As they put it, the beaten 
divisions might just as well be allowed to "bleed to death" completely. 

I was able to observe the results of this theory at the end of Sep- 
tember 1944 when I visited a unit of an experienced tank division near 
Bitburg. Its commander, a man tried and tested by many years in 
warfare, showed me the battlefield where a few days before a newly 
formed, inexperienced tank brigade had met tragedy. Insufficiently 
trained, it had lost ten of its thirty-two new Panthers from bad driving 
while deploying. The remaining twenty-two tanks that had reached 
the deployment area had, as the commander demonstrated, been ranged 
so stupidly on an open field, without adequate reconnaissance, that an 
American antitank unit had shot up fifteen of them as if it were en- 
gaged in target practice. "To think of what my experienced troops 
could have done with these tanks!" the captain said bitterly. I described 
this incident to Hitler, concluding with the caustic comment that this 
example showed that "new levies often have considerable disadvantages 
as against providing replacements." 6 But Hitler remained unimpressed. 
In a situation conference he commented that from his experiences as 
an infantryman he knew that the troops took care of their weapons 
only when supplies were kept extremely meager. 

Other visits showed me that efforts were being made on the Western 
front to arrive at understandings with the enemy on special problems. 
At Arnhem, I found General Bittrich of the Waffen-SS in a state of 
fury. The day before his Second Tank Corps had virtually wiped out a 
British airborne division. During the fighting the general had made 
an arrangement permitting the enemy to run a field hospital situated 
behind the German lines. But party functionaries had taken it upon 
themselves to kill British and American pilots, and Bittrich was cast 
in the role of a liar. His violent denunciation of the party was all the 
more striking since it came from an SS general. 

But even Hitlers former army adjutant, Colonel Engel, who was 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 4OO 

now commanding the Twelfth Infantry Division near Duren, had on 
his own initiative made an agreement with the enemy for rescue of the 
wounded during pauses in battles. It was inadvisable to mention such 
pacts at headquarters, for experience had taught me that Hitler would 
consider them signs of "slackness." Actually, we had often heard him 
disparaging the so-called chivalric tradition of the Prussian officer class. 
In contrast to that, he would say, the toughness and inflexibility of the 
struggle waged in the East on both sides had the effect of strengthening 
the fighting spirit of the enlisted man, since humane considerations 
could not even arise under such conditions. 

I recall just one single case in which Hitler tacitly, though reluc- 
tantly, consented to a deal with the enemy. Late in the autumn of 1944 
the British fleet cut the German troops on the Greek islands off from 
all connection with the mainland. In spite of the total British control 
of the sea, the German units were permitted to embark and sail un- 
disturbed to the mainland; in some cases the German vessels passed 
within visual range of British naval units. As a quid pro quo the German 
side had agreed to use these troops to hold Salonika against the Rus- 
sians until the city could be taken over by British forces. When this 
operation was over— it had been proposed by Jodl— Hitler commented: 
"This is the only time we have consented to anything like that." 

In September 1944 the generals at the front, the industrialists, 
and the Gauleiters of the western regions expected the American and 
British armies to exploit their superior power and roll right over our 
almost unarmed and worn-out troops in an offensive that would never 
pause. 7 No one any longer counted on being able to stop them; no one 
who had preserved any sense of reality believed in anything like a 
"Marne miracle" in our favor. 

Preparations for the demolition of industrial installations of all 
kinds, at home and in the occupied territories, lay within the jurisdic- 
tion of my Ministry. During the retreats in the Soviet Union, Hitler had 
already given orders to negate whatever territorial gains the enemy 
made by following a scorched earth policy. As soon as the invasion 
armies began advancing from their bridgehead in Normandy, he issued 
a similar order. At the beginning, rational operational considerations 
underlay this policy of destruction. The idea was to make it difficult 
for the enemy to establish a foothold, to draw his supplies from the 
liberated country, to make use of technical repair services as well as 
electricity and gas, or in the longer run to build up an armaments 
industry. As long as the end of the war remained a distant eventuality, 
such actions seemed to me justified. But they lost all meaning the 
moment ultimate defeat drew inescapably close. 

In view of the hopeless situation, I very naturally assumed that 



401 ) The Wave from the West 

we wanted to end this war with the least possible devastation of the 
kind that would hamper future reconstruction. For I was not imbued 
by that special mood of total doom which was now beginning to 
spread visibly among Hitler's followers. Hitler himself was more and 
more ruthlessly determined to bring on total catastrophe. But I was 
able to outwit him with his own arguments, and this by a simple 
trick. Since in hopeless situations he also always insisted that the lost 
territories would soon be reconquered, I needed only to repeat this 
premise of his and point out that I would need the industries of these 
areas to maintain arms production as soon as we had reconquered 
them. 

Just after the beginning of the invasion— on June 20, when the 
Americans had broken through the German defensive front and en- 
circled Cherbourg— I used this argument to good effect. This is the 
basis for Hitlers pronouncement that "in spite of the present diffi- 
culties of transportation at the front, abandonment of the industrial 
capacities there is out of the question." 8 This new directive allowed 
the military commander to evade a previous order of Hitler's which 
called for a million Frenchmen working in the restricted factories to be 
transported to Germany in case of a successful invasion. 9 

Now Hitler was once again talking about the necessity for sweep- 
ing destruction of French industry. In spite of this I succeeded on 
August 19, when the Allied troops were still northwest of Paris, in 
making him consent to our merely paralyzing rather than destroying 
the industrial and power installations about to fall into enemy hands.* 
But I could not obtain any fundamental decision from Hitler; I had 
to work from case to case, on the pretense that all retreats were only 
temporary. As time passed, that argument gradually came to seem 
more and more ridiculous. 

When the enemy troops were approaching the ore basin near 
Longwy and Briey toward the end of August, I faced a changed 
situation. Since this region of Lorraine had been practically incor- 
porated into Reich territory in 1940, I found myself running up against 
the jurisdiction of a Gauleiter. Since persuading the Gauleiter to sur- 
render the area to the enemy without destruction was hopeless, I 
appealed directly to Hitler and was authorized to preserve iron mines 

* See FuhrerprotokoU, August 18-20, 1944, Point 8. The verdict delivered Sep- 
tember 30, 1946, by the International Military Tribunal stated concerning this and 
future activities of mine: "In the closing stages of the war he [Speer] was one of the 
few men who had the courage to tell Hitler that the war was lost and to take steps 
to prevent the senseless destruction of production facilities both in Germany and the 
occupied territories. He carried out his opposition to Hitler's scorched earth policy by 
intentionally sabotaging it in certain Western countries and in Germany, at consider- 
able personal danger to himself ." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 402 

and industry, and to inform the Gauleiters involved of this decision.* 
At Saarbnicken in mid-September, Hermann Rochling informed 
me that we had handed over the French mines in running condition. 
But by chance the power plant which kept the mine pumps going was 
still on our side of the front. Rochling sounded me out on whether 
he could continue to deliver current to the pumping stations over the 
still undamaged high-tension line. I agreed to that, as I did to the 
proposal of a troop commander to continue supplying current to the 
hospitals of Liege after the city had fallen to the Allies, and the front 
ran between the city and its power plants. 

From about the middle of September on, I was also faced with 
the question of what was to be done with German industry. Naturally, 
the industrialists were not at all willing to have their factories de- 
stroyed. Surprisingly enough, some of the Gauleiters in the endangered 
areas shared their views. This was a curious phase, both of the war 
and our lives. In roundabout conversations, full of traps and detours, 
one man would probe another's views; groups of accomplices formed; 
and a candid remark on this subject might mean putting your life on 
the line. 

By way of precaution, in case Hitler should hear of the nonde- 
struction of plants in German frontline areas, I informed him— in a 
report on a trip I had made between September 10-14— that produc- 
tion continued on a relatively satisfactory basis even right behind the 
front. I made the point that if a factory in Aachen, so close to the front, 
could turn out four million rounds of infantry ammunition per month, 

* The Gauleiter of Cologne (Grohe) had been placed in charge of Belgium by 
Hitler; the Gauleiter of Mosel (Simon) was assigned Luxembourg and the Minette 
region; and the Gauleiter of the Saar Palatinate (Burkel) was assigned the area be- 
tween the Meurthe and the Moselle. Assured of Hitler's consent, I could thus write 
to Gauleiter Simon on September 5,' 1944: 

Plans must be made so that if the Minette, the Luxembourg area, and other 
industrial regions fall into enemy hands, the factories will only be crippled 
temporarily; this is to be achieved by removing various elements and taking them 
along on the retreat, particularly the electrical ones, without damaging the fac- 
tories themselves. We must count on recovering the Minette region, since in the 
long run we would not be able to continue the war without it. Our experiences 
in Russia have shown that industrial plants can change owners several times 
without either side's inflicting damage; each side simply runs the factory accord- 
ing to its own needs. The coal and iron associations will receive the appropriate 
instructions. 

These associations received the same orders with the additional request that "the 
same measures be applied to the endangered coal-producing areas in Belgium, 
Holland, and the Saar. The pumps for the mines must be kept in perfect working 
order." 



403 ) The Wave from the West 

the sensible thing was to keep making this ammunition for the im- 
mediate use of the troops right up to the last moment, even under 
artillery bombardment. It would not be sensible, I argued, to shut 
down coking works in Aachen if these could continue to assure the 
supply of gas to Cologne, as in the past, and if at the same time a 
few tons of fuel for the troops were produced every day. Furthermore, 
it would be a mistake to shut down the power plants in the immediate 
vicinity of the front since the telephone communications of the troops 
and civilian populace were dependent on the supply of electricity. 

Simultaneously, I sent the Gauleiters a teletype message referring 
to earlier decisions by Hitler and warning that industrial installations 
must not be damaged. 10 

Suddenly all these efforts seemed nullified. For when I was back 
in Berlin the chief of our Central Office, Liebel, met me in our guest- 
house for engineers at Wannsee and informed me that during my 
absence important orders from Hitler had gone out to all the ministries. 
According to these latest orders, the principle of scorched earth must 
be ruthlessly carried out on German territory. 

Partly to be safe from eavesdroppers, we sprawled on the guest- 
house lawn. It was a sunny, late summer day; sailboats moved slowly 
along the lake, as Liebel drew the picture of what the Fuehrer's latest 
edict meant. No German was to inhabit territory occupied by the 
enemy. Those wretches who did remain would find themselves in a 
desert devoid of all the amenities of civilization. Not only the in- 
dustrial plants, and not only the gas, water, electrical works and tele- 
phone exchanges were to be completely smashed. Everything, simply 
everything essential to the maintenance of life would be destroyed: 
the ration card records, the files of marriage and resident registries, 
the records of bank accounts. In addition, food supplies were to be 
destroyed, farms burned down and cattle killed. Not even those works 
of art that the bombs had spared were to be preserved. Monuments, 
palaces, castles and churches, theaters and opera houses were also 
to be leveled. A few days earlier, at Hitlers command, an editorial 
had appeared in the Volkischer Beobachter (September 7, 1944) put- 
ting this surge of vandalism into rhetoric: "Not a German stalk of 
wheat is to feed the enemy, not a German mouth to give him informa- 
tion, not a German hand to offer him help. He is to find every foot- 
bridge destroyed, every road blocked— nothing but death, annihilation, 
and hatred will meet him." 11 

In my travel report I had tried to arouse Hitler's sympathy for 
the war victims: "In the vicinity of Aachen one sees the miserable 
processions of evacuees, setting out with small children and the old, 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 404 

exactly as in France in 1940. As more evacuations take place, scenes 
such as these will surely multiply, which should make for restraint 
in issuing evacuation orders." I called upon Hitler to "go to the West 
to see for yourself the conditions there. . . . The populace expects 
this of you." 12 

But Hitler did not go. On the contrary. As soon as he heard 
that Kreisleiter Schmeer of Aachen had not applied all means of 
coercion to evacuate the city, he stripped him of his various posts, 
expelled him from the party, and ordered him to the front as an ordinary 
soldier. 

It would have been pointless to try to persuade Hitler to rescind 
this order. And my authority did not suffice for independent action. 
Nevertheless my anxiety was so great that I impulsively dictated a 
teletype message with the request that after Hitler had approved it 
Bormann transmit it to the eight Gauleiters of the western areas. 
It was a stratagem for getting Hitler to reverse himself. I therefore 
said nothing at all about the radical orders of recent days, but in- 
stead reviewed the previous decisions on various individual problems 
and asked for some over-all ruling. My text was once again psy- 
chologically attuned to Hitler's real or pretended faith in ultimate 
victory: Unless he canceled his order for destruction, he was admitting 
that the war was lost. By such an admission he undercut the whole basis 
of argument for total resistance. Incisively, I began: 

The Fuehrer has declared that he can shortly reconquer the territories 
now lost. Since the western areas are vital for the armaments and war pro- 
duction needed to continue fighting, all measures undertaken in connection 
with evacuation must have in view the possibility of restoring full func- 
tioning to the industry of these areas. . . . Not until the last moment are 
the industrial installations to be rendered useless for a considerable time 
by "disabling actions" in the factories. . . . The power plants in the mining 
districts must be preserved, so that the water levels in the mine shafts may 
be controlled. If pumps fail and the pits fill, it takes months before the 
shafts can be restored to functioning condition. 

Shortly afterward I telephoned headquarters to ask whether this 
teletype message had been presented to Hitler. It had, and had actual- 
ly been issued, although with one slight change. I had anticipated 
cuts here and there, and probably some stiffening of the passages on 
disabling actions. But to my surprise Hitler had left the text unaltered 
except for one place, where the change had been made in his own 
hand. He had toned down the expression of his confidence in victory. 
The first sentence now read: "Recapture of a part of the territories now 
lost in the West is by no means out of the question." 



405 ) The Wave from the West 

Bormann passed this teletype message on to the Gauleiters with 
the forceful addition: "In behalf of the Fuehrer I herewith transmit 
to you a communication from Reich Minister Speer. Its provisos are 
to be observed strictly and unconditionally." 13 Even Bormann had 
played along with me. He seemed to be more aware than Hitler of 
the fearful consequences of total devastation in all the areas from 
which we were retreating. 

Basically, however, Hitler was merely trying to save face when he 
spoke of "recapture of a part of the territories now lost in the West." 
For it had finally been borne upon him that even if we succeeded 
in stabilizing the front, the war would be lost within a few months 
because of lack of materiel. Jodl had in the meantime supplemented 
my previous forecasts on armaments policy by pointing out the stra- 
tegic considerations: The army was holding too large an area under 
occupation. He used the image of a snake that had lost its swiftness 
from swallowing too large a prey. He therefore proposed abandon- 
ment of Finland, northern Norway, upper Italy, and most of the 
Balkans. By so doing we would be able to establish geographically more 
favorable defensive positions along the Tisa and Sava rivers and the 
southern margin of the Alps. It would also release many divisions. At 
first Hitler was stubbornly opposed to this; but finally, on August 20, 
1944, he gave me permission 14 at least to calculate where we would stand 
without the raw materials from these areas. 

But three days before I had finished my memorandum— on September 
2, 1944— an armistice was concluded between Finland and the Soviet 
Union, and German troops were asked to evacuate Finland by September 
15. Jodl telephoned me at once and asked for my findings. Hitler's mood 
had again changed. He no longer showed the slightest signs of willing- 
ness to undertake a voluntary evacuation. Jodl, on the other hand, was 
pressing for an immediate withdrawal from Lapland while the weather 
was still good. We would inevitably suffer great loss of arms, he declared, 
if the retreat were caught in the blizzards which started there early 
in autumn. Once again Hitler made the point he had used a year before 
during the dispute over evacuation of the manganese mines of the south- 
ern Soviet Union: "If the sources of nickel in northern Lapland are lost, 
our armaments production will be finished in a few months." 

That argument did not last long. On September 5, three days after 
the Russo-Finnish armistice, I sent my memorandum to Jodl and Hitler 
by courier. The war of materiel would be decided, I demonstrated, not 
by loss of the Finnish nickel mines, but by the ending of deliveries of 
chromium ores from Turkey. Assuming that full production of armaments 
would continue— which of course was highly hypothetical, given the air 
raids— the last distribution of chromium to industry would come on June 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 406 

1, 1945. "Considering the time needed by the processing industries, the 
production dependent on chromium, which means the entire production 
of armaments, will cease on January 1, 1946." 15 

By now Hitler's reactions had long since become entirely unpre- 
dictable. I was prepared for an outburst of impotent fury; but in fact 
he received my information calmly, drew no conclusions, and against 
Jodl's advice put off the evacuation of Lapland until the middle of Octo- 
ber. In the light of the general military situation, such forecasts as mine 
probably left him quite unmoved. Since the fronts had collapsed both 
in the West and the East, the date January 1, 1946, probably seemed even 
to Hitler a Utopian deadline. 

At the moment we were far more bothered by the consequences of 
the fuel shortage. In July, I had written to Hitler that by September 
all tactical movements would necessarily come to a standstill for lack of 
fuel. Now this prediction was being confirmed. At the end of September, 
I wrote to Hitler: "A fighter group stationed at Krefeld with more than 
thirty-seven planes must take two days enforced rest in spite of excellent 
weather. It receives its fuel allotment only on the third day and then 
only enough for a brief sortie as far as Aachen with twenty of its planes." 
A few days later, when I visited an airport in Werneuchen, east of Berlin, 
the commander of the training company informed me that his student 
pilots could have flight practice only for an hour every week. Only a 
fraction of the necessary fuel was being supplied to the unit. 

Meanwhile the army, too, had become virtually immobile because 
of the fuel shortage. At the end of October, I reported to Hitler after a 
night journey to the Tenth Army south of the Po. There I encountered 
"a column of a hundred and fifty trucks, each of which had four oxen 
hitched to it. Many trucks were being pulled by tanks and tractors." 
Early in December, I expressed concern that "the training of tank drivers 
leaves much to be desired" because they "have no fuel for practicing." 16 
General Jodl, of course, knew even better than I how great the emergency 
was. In order to free seventeen and a half thousand tons of fuel— form- 
erly the production of two and a half days— for the Ardennes offensive, 
he had to begin withholding fuel from other army groups on November 
10, 1944. 17 

In the meantime the attacks on the hydrogenation plants had in- 
directly affected the entire chemical industry. I was forced to inform 
Hitler that "the supply of salt has to be stretched in order to fill the 
existing shells with explosives. This process has already reached the 
limit of acceptability." Actually, from October 1944 on our explosives 
consisted of 20 percent rock salt, which reduced their effectiveness cor- 
respondingly. 18 

In this desperate situation Hitler now made matters worse by gam- 
bling away his last technological trump. Grotesquely enough, in these 



! i 1 



R^-V^'T 



■ : 



1 ^X- 




* i* 



Hitler returning from a short icalk at his headquarters in the 
Ukraine, summer 1Q42. ( heinrich hoffmann ) 




Goering and Speer after Speer s appointment to his post as 
Minister of Armaments, ( heinricii iioia< mann ) 



Goering at his hi 


rthday party, 


1942. 






( SUDDEUTSCHER VERLAG ) 














w * 




^^**y n^k 






k 




W< M 








J K J 












lj 






WCi. 


1 




^^^^ 








. 
















S])eer testing new caterpillar 
tread motorcycle at tank-test ini 
site in Thiiringia. 

( ULLSTELY BILDF.HDIFXST ) 



Hitler inspecting a new army 
truck. Left to right: Sj)eer, 
unknown, Werlin (director of 
Mercedes-Benz), Hitler. 

(HEIMRICII HOFFMAN X ) 



m 






left: Porsche and Speer in 
prototype of the Tiger tank. 

( SPEER-ARCHIV ) 

above: Conference after 
test drive. Ferdinand 
Porsche (wearing cap and 
goggles), behind him Hugo 
Eckener, builder of the 
Graf Zeppelin. On the 
right, Speer. 

( SPIEGEL-ARCHIV ) 

right: Speer, Saw, and 
Hitler at a display of new 
tank models at Hitler s 
headquarters, 1943. 

(SPEER-ARCHIV) 




If, 




H 



i 





Doenitz and Speer, October 2943. ( speek-ahchiv ) 



German industrialists during an evening of recreation, following a 
meeting on naval armaments, October ig^s. ( speeh-ahchiv ) 



* 



f * 



f* 




is? J r.^Zt* 






Eighth Air Force bombing of Schweinfurt, October 14, 1943. 
(united press international) 




above: In the trench at the 
Murmansk front. Left, 
General Hengl, com- 
mander of the northern- 
most German army, 
December 1943. (speer-archiv) 

right: June 1944: Speer 
and Milch, (spiegel-archiv) 




Bunker on the Atlantic coast. 

( SPEER-ARCHIV ) 










^ 



t\e* 



t.» • 






above: Hitlers design for bunker, 1Q42. 
The drawing was executed neatly, the 
legends highly readable. (speer-archiv) 

left: In March 1945 Hitler had the 
trembling handwriting of an old man. 

( speer-archiv ) 



Hitler, accompanied by 
Speer, on his daily walk 
from the Berghof to the 
teahouse, i§44> "We often 
walked in silence side by 
side, each dwelling on his 
own thoughts" 

( IIEiNRIClI HOFFMANN ) 




Silesia, February ig4$: Heinrici, Mah-acher, Speer meeting to 
control remaining destruction. ( spiegel-archiv ) 



The Remagen bridgehead over the Rhine, March 1Q45. 

( UNITED PRESS INTERNATIONAL ) 




•m 



Turtp ^w»fr » r [ jifflwyWT" 




The grea£ gallery in the last days of the ivar. ( spiegel-archiv ) 



Soviet tanks roll into Berlin, (united press international) 



4 • *~* ' 






\ lilt f # 

i > 1. ! ilUl I 


L \ ' V 




i V .A ■' F^ytF <i 




1 1 1< ••*-. ■ r 1 7 




V \ 1 r f / 


, WAVE 


L. A " r _J ^ 


m '•'• V " 


yi^i ^;y«r4 ^j **:m 






***B 



r 






nr 











S3. v> ^; 




Tfte fallen emblem of Hitler s Reich. 

( SPIEGEL- ARCHIV ) 



Tfte wrecked hall of the Chancellery, (acme) 




Speer making his final speech before the Tribunal at Nuremberg, 
1946. Front row, left to right: Rosenberg, Frank, Frick, Stretcher, 
Funk, Schacht. Second row, left to right: Seyss-Inquart, Speer, 
von Neurath, Fritzsche. 




Speer in his cell in Nuremberg, 1946. ( associated press photo ) 



407 ) The Wave from the West 

very months we were producing more and more fighter planes. Alto- 
gether, during this late phase of the war twelve thousand seven hundred 
and twenty fighters were delivered to the troops which had started the 
war in 1939 with only seven hundred and seventy-one fighter planes. 19 
At the end of July, Hitler had for the second time agreed to assemble 
two thousand pilots for a special training course. We were still hoping 
that by intensive use of fighters we could inflict such heavy losses on the 
American air forces that we would force them to stop the bombing. For 
during their flights to their target and back to their bases, these bomber 
squadrons exposed a flank that was on the average six hundred miles 
long. 

Fighter Commander General Adolf Galland and I had calculated that 
on the average one German fighter plane would be lost over Germany in 
order to shoot down a bomber, but that the expenditure of materiel on 
both sides would be in the proportion of one to six and the attrition 
of pilots one to two. Moreover, since half of our downed pilots could 
parachute safely to ground, while the enemy crew would be taken 
prisoner on German soil, the advantage was surely on our side, even given 
the enemy superiority in men, materials, and training potential.* 

Around August io, Galland, in extreme agitation, asked me to fly with 
him to headquarters at once. In one of his arbitrary decisions Hitler had 
issued new orders: The Reich air fleet, whose outfitting with two thou- 
sand fighter planes was nearing completion, was suddenly to be shifted 
to the western front. There, experience had long since shown us, it would 
be wiped out within a short time. 

Hitler, of course, guessed why we were visiting him. He knew he had 
broken the promise he gave me in July to have the hydrogenation plants 
protected by fighter planes. But he forestalled a quarrel at the situation 
conference and agreed to receive us alone afterward 

I began by cautiously expressing doubts of the usefulness of his 
order and mastered my strong feelings by explaining as calmly as possible 
the catastrophic situation in armaments production. I cited figures and 
sketched the consequences that would follow from continued bombings. 
That alone made Hitler nervous and angry. Although he listened in si- 
lence, I could see by his expression, by the lively fluttering of his hands, 
the way he chewed his fingernails, that he was growing increasingly tense. 
When I finished, thinking I had amply proved that every available plane 
in the Reich should be employed to combat the bombers, Hitler was no 
longer in control of himself. His face had flushed deep red; his eyes had 

* Central Planning announced on May 25, 1944: "The number of planes which 
will be completed in May is so large that the General Staff believes it will be 
eventually possible to inflict such losses on the enemy that he will no longer be able 
to afford flights over the Reich. If five fighters can be assigned to each enemy aircraft, 
the bomber is certain to be shot down. At the moment each bomber shot down 
costs us one of our fighter planes." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 408 

turned lifeless and fixed. Then he roared out at the top of his lungs: 
"Operative measures are my concern! Kindly concern yourself with your 
armaments! This is none of your business." Possibly he might have been 
more receptive had I talked to him privately. The presence of Galland 
made him incapable of understanding or flexibility. 

Abruptly, he terminated the conference, cutting off all further argu- 
ment. "I have no more time for you." Deeply perplexed, I returned to my 
barracks office with Galland. 

The next day we were on the point of flying back to Berlin, our mis- 
sion a failure, when Schaub informed us that we were to report to Hitler 
again. This time Hitler s rage was even more violent; he spoke faster and 
faster, stumbling over his own words: 

I want no more planes produced at all. The fighter arm is to be dis- 
solved. Stop aircraft production! Stop it at once, understand? You're always 
complaining about the shortage of skilled workers, aren't you? Put them 
into flak production at once. Let all the workers produce antiaircraft guns. 
Use all the material for that too! Now that's an order. Send Saur to head- 
quarters immediately. A program for flak production must be set up. Tell 
Saur that too. A program five times what we have now. . . . Well shift 
hundreds of thousands of workers into flak production. Every day I read 
in the foreign press reports how dangerous flak is. They still have some 
respect for that, but not for our fighters. 

Galland started to reply that the fighters would shoot down far more 
planes if they could be committed inside Germany, but he did not get 
beyond the first words. Again we were abruptly dismissed, actually 
thrown out. 

In the teahouse I poured myself a glass of vermouth from the bottle 
that stood there for just such purposes; my stomach nerves had been 
affected by the scene. Galland, ordinarily so calm and controlled, looked 
distraught for the first time since I had known him. He could not grasp 
the fact that his fighter plane command was going to be dissolved, and 
what was more, on grounds of cowardice in the face of the enemy. For 
my part, I was acquainted with such tantrums on Hitler s part and knew 
that his decisions would usually be rescinded or revised by cautious 
change of course. I reassured Galland. The industrial facilities being used 
to build fighter planes could not be applied to the production of gun 
barrels, I told him. Our problem was not any shortage of flak guns, I 
pointed out, but the ammunition for them, and above all our lack of 
explosives. 

Saur too, who also felt that Hitler was making unfulfillable demands, 
pointed out discreetly to Hitler the next day that increased production 
of antiaircraft guns depended mainly on the supply of special machine 
tools for drilling long tubes. 



409 ) The Wave from the West 

Soon afterward I went to headquarters again, this time accompanied 
by Saur, to discuss the details of his order— which to our sorrow had been 
made more official by being sent in writing. After a long struggle, Hitler 
lowered his original demand for a fivefold increase by half. He gave us 
a deadline of December 1945 to meet *hk quota and also demanded 
that the ammunition for these guns be doubled. 20 We were able to deal 
with more than twenty-eight points on the agenda, with a minimum of 
excitement on his part. But when I once more referred to our need to 
have the fighter planes committed to defense of the home front, he again 
interrupted me angrily, repeated his command to increase flak produc- 
tion at the expense of the fighter plane, and declared the meeting over. 

That was the first command from Hitler that neither Saur nor I 
obeyed. I was acting on my own initiative and judgment when, on the 
following day, I stated to the Armaments Staff: "We must in any case 
maintain the production of fighter planes at a maximum." Three days 
later I called a meeting of the representatives of the air industry and 
explained to them, in Galland's presence, the importance of their assign- 
ment: "By sending the production of fighter aircraft soaring we can 
meet the greatest danger we face: the crushing of our armaments manu- 
facture on the home front."* Meanwhile, however, Hitler had calmed 
down and suddenly, without another word on the subject, approved my 
proposal that a limited fighter aircraft program be assigned to the category 
of highest priority. 

At the very time we were being forced to cut production in various 
fields, and actually to abandon new developments, Hitler began more and 
more pointedly alluding to future new weapons which would decide the 
war, thus arousing hopes among the generals and the political leaders. 
On my visits to divisions, I was frequently asked, with a mysterious 
smile, when the secret weapons would be coming along. I did not like 
such illusions, for sooner or later the hope would have to be dashed. In 
the middle of September, therefore, I addressed the following lines to 
Hitler: 

Belief in the imminent commitment of new, decisive weapons is wide- 
spread among the troops. They are expecting such commitment within days 
or weeks. This opinion is also seriously shared by high-ranking officers. It 
is questionable whether it is right, in such difficult times, to arouse hopes 
which cannot be fulfilled in so short a time and therefore must necessarily 
produce a disappointment which could have unfavorable effects upon 
morale. Since the population, too, is daily waiting for the miracle of the 
new weapons, wondering whether we know that the eleventh hour is already 

* Quotations from the Office Journal, August 21 and 24, 1944. Despite Hitler's 
order that fighter plane production be cut in half, production remained at almost 
the same level: 2305 in July, 2352 in December. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 410 

upon us and that holding back these new— stockpiled— weapons can no 
longer be justified, the question arises whether this propaganda serves a use- 
ful purpose.* 

In a private talk Hitler admitted that I was right. Nevertheless, as I 
soon heard, he continued to dangle the prospect of the secret weapons. 
On November 2, 1944, therefore, I wrote to Goebbels that "it seems to me 
unwise to arouse hopes in the public which cannot possibly be fulfilled 
for a considerable time. ... I would therefore request you to take meas- 
ures so that the daily press and technical journals refrain from alluding 
to future successes in our armaments production." 

Goebbels actually put an end to these reports on new weapons. But 
strangely enough, the rumors increased. It was only at the Nuremberg 
Trial that I learned from Hans Fritzsche, one of the Propaganda Minis- 
ter s foremost associates, that Goebbels had set up a special department 
for spreading such rumors. Then, too, I realized why these rumors were 
often so uncannily close to what indeed we projected for the future. How 
often at our armaments conferences we had sat together in the evening 
telling each other about the newest technological developments. Even 
the possibilities of an atom bomb were discussed on such occasions. 
One of Goebbels's chief assistants had often participated in these meet- 
ings as a reporter and thus been present at the evening gatherings. 

In those turbulent times in which everyone was eager to find reason 
for hope, rumors found fertile soil. On the other hand, the populace had 

* See travel report, September 10-14, 1944« A few days before, on August 31, 
1944, I had told my colleagues that "I do not intend to succumb to the psychosis 
of attaching too much importance to the new weapons. Nor am I responsible for 
the extremely prominent place they are being given in our propaganda." On 
December 1, 1944, after a display of new weapons in Rechlin, I said to my asso- 
ciates: "You have seen that we do not have a miraculous secret weapon and prob- 
ably never will have one. We for our part, speaking as technicians, have always 
made it perfectly clear to anyone who cared to listen that technical miracles of the 
sort that the layman expects are not really possible. . . . During my tours of the 
front I have time and again observed that the divisional and regimental com- 
manders are concerned because their men are more and more clinging to a faith 
in these miracle weapons. I consider such delusions ominous/' 

A few weeks later, on January 13, 1945, I was asked by a group of generals 
and corps commanders: "Can we still count on the introduction of new weapons, 
now that there has been so much propaganda about them for the past three 
months?" I replied: "For my part I can only say that I am firmly opposed to these 
rumors. After all, I am not the author of this propaganda. ... I have repeated 
again and again that we cannot expect miraculous secret weapons, and I have also 
notified the Fuehrer several times that I consider this entire propaganda cam- 
paign utterly wrong-headed, not only because it is misleading but also because it 
underrates the German soldier's fighting powers. . . . We will never have a secret 
weapon that will end the war in one blow. There is simply no such thing in the 
offing." 



4ii ) The Wave from the West 

long since stopped believing the newspapers. There was one exception: 
During the closing months of the war a growing band of desperate people 
began pinning their hopes on the astrological sheets. Since these were 
dependent on the Propaganda Ministry, for a variety of reasons they 
were, as I learned from Fritzsche at Nuremberg, used as a tool for influ- 
encing public opinion. Fake horoscopes spoke of valleys of darkness which 
had to be passed through, foretold imminent surprises, intimated happy 
outcomes. Only in the astrological sheets did the regime still have a future. 



28 
The Plunge 



The armaments industry, which from the spring of 1944 had been 
unified in my Ministry, began to disintegrate by the late autumn. For 
one thing, the big rocket project had, as I have already related, been 
transferred to the SS. Then again, several Gauleiters had contrived to 
take over responsibility for armaments within their own districts. Hitler 
supported such enterprises. For example, he gave his consent when 
Sauckel as Gauleiter of Thuringia volunteered to set up a large under- 
ground factory for mass production of a single-motored jet fighter which 
Hitler dubbed the "people's fighter." But by then we were already en- 
tering our economic death throes, so that this splintering no longer had 
serious effects. 

Along with such last-ditch efforts hopes arose, which could be 
construed as signs of increasing confusion, that we would win through 
even with primitive weapons and thus compensate for our technological 
predicament. The courage of the individual soldier was to take the place 
of technological efficiency in arms. In April 1944, Doenitz had put the 
ingenious Vice Admiral Heye in charge of building one-man submarines 
and other small fighting craft. But it was August before the piecework 
production reached sizable numbers, and by then the invasion had suc- 
ceeded and it was really too late for such projects. Himmler, for his part, 
wanted to set up a "suicide squad" piloting manned rocket planes which 

( 412 ) 



413 ) The Plunge 

would destroy the enemy bombers by ramming them. Another primitive 
weapon was the Panzerfaust (tank destroyer), a small rocket shot from 
the hand, which was to substitute for the antitank guns we did not 
have.* 

In the late autumn of 1944, Hitler abruptly intervened in the matter 
of gas masks and appointed a special commissioner directly responsible 
to him. With great haste a program was set up to protect the entire 
population from the effects of gas warfare. Although gas mask produc- 
tion rose to more than two million three hundred thousand per month, 
it was evident that it would take a while before the entire urban popula- 
tion could be properly equipped. The party organs therefore published 
advice on primitive gas protection methods, such as the use of paper 
masks. 

At the time, it is true, Hitler spoke of the danger of an enemy gas 
attack on German cities.** But Dr. Karl Brandt, whom he entrusted with 
the protective measures, thought it not unlikely that these hectic prepara- 
tions were intended to serve the ends of gas warfare that we would 
begin. Among our "secret weapons" we possessed a poison gas called 
tabun; it penetrated the filters of all known gas masks and contact with 
even very small lingering quantities had fatal effects. 

Robert Ley, by profession a chemist, took me along in his special rail- 
road car to a meeting in Sonthofen held in the autumn of 1944. As usual, 
our conversation took place over glasses of strong wines. His increased 
stammering betrayed his agitation: "You know we have this new poison 
gas— IVe heard about it. The Fuehrer must do it. He must use it. Now he 
has to do it! When else! This is the last moment. You too must make him 
realize that it's time." I remained silent. But apparently Ley had had a sim- 
ilar conversation with Goebbels, for the Propaganda Minister asked some 
of my associates in the chemical industry about the substance and its ef- 
fect, and then urged Hitler to employ this novel gas. Hitler, to be sure, had 
always rejected gas warfare; but now he hinted at a situation conference 

* Modeled on the American bazooka, 997,000 were produced in November 1944, 
1,253,000 in December, and 1,200,000 in January 1945. 

** In fact on August 5, 1944, Churchill called for a report on England's capa- 
bility for waging poison-gas war against Germany. According to the report, the avail- 
able 32,000 tons of mustard and phosgene gas would effectively poison 965 square 
miles of German territory, more than Berlin, Hamburg, Cologne, Essen, Frankfurt, 
and Kassel combined. See David Irving, Die Geheimwaffen des Dritten Retches 
(Hamburg, 1969). According to my letter of October 11, 1944, to Keitel (RLA 
1302/44), our production—until the chemical industry was bombed during the summer 
of 1944— amounted to 3100 tons of mustard gas and 1000 tons of tabun per month. Our 
side must thus have accumulated large quantities of poison gas during the five war 
years, more than the British supplies, even assuming that our production capacity was 
considerably extended during the war. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 414 

in headquarters that the use of gas might stop the advance of the Soviet 
troops. He went on with vague speculations that the West would accept 
gas warfare against the East because at this stage of the war the British 
and American governments had an interest in stopping the Russian ad- 
vance. When no one at the situation conference spoke up in agreement, 
Hitler did not return to the subject. 

Undoubtedly the generals feared the unpredictable consequences. 
I myself wrote to Keitel on October 11, 1944, that because of the blows 
to the chemical industry we were quite out of such basic materials as 
cyanide and methanol.* On November 1, therefore, the production of 
tabun had to be stopped and that of mustard gas limited to a quarter of 
capacity. Keitel, to be sure, obtained an order from Hitler not to reduce 
poison-gas production under any circumstances. But such orders no longer 
bore any relation to realities. I did not respond and merely allotted the 
basic chemical materials as I pleased. 

On November 11 a new note of alarm entered my frequent memo- 
randa on shutdowns in the fuel industry. For more than six weeks, 
traffic to and from the Ruhr area had been blocked. It is self-evident, 
given the whole nature of the Reich's economic structure," I wrote to 
Hitler, "that cessation of production in the Rhine- Westphalian industrial 
area is intolerable for the entire German economy and for a successful 
conduct of the war. . . . The most important armaments plants are re- 
ported on the verge of going under. Under existing conditions there 
is no way to avoid these shutdowns/' 

Denied fresh supplies of Ruhr coal, I continued, the railroads 
were rapidly exhausting their stocks of coal, as were the gas works; oil 
and margarine plants were on the verge of shutdowns, and even the 
supply of coke to the hospitals had become inadequate. 1 

Things were literally moving rapidly toward the end. Signs of total 
anarchy loomed before us. Coal trains no longer reached their destina- 
tions but were stopped en route by Gauleiters who confiscated them 
for their own needs. The buildings in Berlin were unheated; gas and 
electricity were available only during restricted hours. A howl arose 
from the Chancellery: Our coal authority had refused to let it have its 
full consignment for the rest of the winter. 

Faced with this situation we could no longer carry out our programs, 
but only try to produce parts. Once our remaining stocks were used 
up, armaments production would cease. In drawing this conclusion 

* Li October 1944 the necessary materials for poison-gas production were still 
being manufactured: methanol (21,500 tons per month in 1943) at the rate of 10,900 
tons in October 1944; cyanide (1234 tons in 1943) at the rate of 336 tons in October 
1944. 



415 ) The Plunge 

I underestimated— as no doubt the enemy air strategists did also— the 
large stocks of materials that had been accumulated in the factories. 2 
An extensive search showed that high production of armaments could 
in fact be continued, but only for a few months more. Hitler accepted 
a last "emergency or supplementary program/' as we called it, with a 
calm that seemed truly uncanny. He did not waste a word on the ob- 
vious implications, although there could be no doubt what these were. 

Around this time Hitler, at a situation conference, commented in 
the presence of all the generals: "We have the good fortune to have a 
genius in our armaments industry. I mean Saur. All difficulties are being 
overcome by him." 

General Thomale put in a tactful word: "Mein Fiihrer, Minister 
Speer is here." 

"Yes, I know," Hitler replied curtly, annoyed at the interruption. 
"But Saur is the genius who will master the situation." 

Oddly enough, I swallowed this deliberate insult without any pertur- 
bation, almost indifferently. I was beginning to take my leave of Hitler. 

On October 12, 1944, when the military situation in the West had 
settled down again and it became possible to speak of a front once 
more— not of a helplessly retreating horde of men— Hitler took me aside 
during a situation conference, told me I must not say a word to anyone, 
and then revealed that he was going to carry out a great offensive in the 
West by concentrating all available forces. "For that you must organize 
a special corps of German construction workers, one sufficiently motorized 
to be able to carry out all types of bridge building even if rail transporta- 
tion should be halted. Stick to the organizational forms that proved their 
value in the western campaign of 1940." 3 I pointed out to Hitler that 
we scarcely had enough trucks left for such a task. "Everything else 
must be put aside for the sake of this," he declared emphatically. "No 
matter what the consequences. This will be the great blow which must 
succeed." 

Around the end of November, Hitler said once again that he was 
staking everything on this offensive. Since he was sure of its success, 
he added nonchalantly that it was his last effort: "If it does not succeed, 
I no longer see any possibility for ending the war well. . . . But we will 
come through," he added, and promptly strayed off into more and more 
expansive and fantastic notions: "A single breakthrough on the western 
front! You'll see! It will lead to collapse and panic among the Americans. 
We'll drive right through their middle and take Antwerp. Then they'll 
have lost their supply port. And a tremendous pocket will encircle the 
entire English army, with hundreds of thousands of prisoners. As we used 
to do in Russia!" 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 416 

About this time I met Albert Vogler to discuss the desperate situation 
the bombings had produced in the Ruhr. He asked me bluntly: "When 
are we going to call it quits?" 

I indicated that Hitler was planning to stake everything on a last 
effort. 

Obstinately, Vogler continued: "But does he fully realize that after 
that we have to call it quits? We're losing too much of our substance. 
How will we be able to reconstruct if industry goes on taking such a 
beating even for a few months more?" 

"I think," I replied, "that Hitler is playing his last card and knows 
it, too." 

Vogler gave me a skeptical look. "Of course, it's his last card, now 
that our production is collapsing all over the place. Is this operation 
going to be directed against the East, to take off the pressure there?" 

I avoided an answer. 

"Of course, it will be on the eastern front," Vogler said. "Nobody 
could be so crazy as to strip the East in order to try to hold back the 
enemy in the West." 

From November on, General Guderian, the army chief of staff, re- 
peatedly called Hitler's attention to the threat to Upper Silesia resulting 
from the Russian troop concentrations on the eastern front. Naturally, 
he wanted the divisions assembled for the offensive in the West shifted 
to the eastern theater of war, to avoid a total breakdown there. At the 
Nuremberg Trial a number of the defendants attempted to justify the 
continuance of the war beyond the winter of 1944-45 on the grounds 
that Hitler had only wanted to save the lives of the refugees from the 
East and to keep German soldiers from Russian imprisonment. But the 
decisions he made at that time are proof to the contrary. 

I held the view that it was essential to play this "last card" as im- 
pressively as possible. I arranged with Field Marshal Model, the com- 
mander of Army Group B, to keep him supplied with improvised arma- 
ments aid during the offensive. On December 16, the day of the attack, 
I set out from Berlin, bound for a small headquarters in a hunting lodge 
near Bonn. Riding through the night in a Reichsbahn diesel car, I saw 
the switching yards east of the Rhine jammed with freight cars. The 
enemy bombers had prevented the movement of supplies for the offensive. 

Model's headquarters was situated in a narrow wooded valley in 
the Eifel mountains; it was a large hunting lodge owned by a wealthy 
industrialist. Model had not built bunkers for fear of attracting the at- 
tention of enemy reconnaissance planes to the site months beforehand. 
He was in good humor, for the surprise assault had succeeded in breaking 
through the front; his troops were advancing rapidly. We were having 
the right sort of weather too, just what Hitler had wanted. He had said: 
"We must have bad weather, otherwise the operation cannot succeed." 



417 ) The Plunge 

As a camp follower I tried to get as close as possible to the front. 
The advancing troops were in good spirits, for low-lying clouds ham- 
pered all enemy air activity. But, by the second day of the offensive, 
transportation had already reached a chaotic state. Motor vehicles could 
move only a foot at a time along the three-lane highway. My car took 
an hour on the average to move two miles, wedged in as it was by am- 
munition trucks. I kept fearing that the weather might improve. 

Model offered all sorts of reasons for this confusion— lack of disci- 
pline in newly formed units, for example, or the chaos in the hintetland. 
But whatever the reasons, the whole scene showed that the army had 
lost its erstwhile famous talent for organization— surely one of the effects 
of Hitler s three years of command. \ 

The first destination of our laborious progress was a blown-up bridge 
on the northern wing of the Sixth SS Armored Army. In order to make 
myself useful I had promised Model to find out how the bridge could 
be repaired as quickly as possible. The soldiers took a skeptical view 
of my presence on the scene. My adjutant heard one of them explain: 
"The Fuehrer rapped him because the bridge isn't ready yet. Now he's 
got orders to clean up the mess himself." And in fact, the bridge building 
was going forward very sluggishly. For the construction crews from the 
Todt Organization, which we had carefully assembled, were stuck in 
the inextricable traffic jams east of the Rhine, along with the greater part 
of the engineering materials. Thus the imminent end of the offensive 
was obviously in the offing, if only because of the lack of essential bridge- 
building materials. 

Inadequate supplies of fuel also hampered operations. The armored 
formations had started the attack with meager fuel reserves. Hitler, with 
his optimistic improvidence, had counted on their being able to supply 
themselves later on from captured American stocks. When the offensive 
threatened to grind to a halt, I helped Model by telephoning orders to 
the gasoline plants of the nearby Ruhr area to improvise tank car trains, 
which they then managed to get to the front. 

But the flow of supplies ceased when the foggy weather changed 
in a few days and the cloudless sky filled with innumerable enemy fighter 
planes and bombers. A drive by day became a problem even for a fast 
passenger car; we were often glad to seek the shelter of a small patch 
of woods. Now the supply services could only operate during the night, 
groping their way forward, virtually without any visibility, almost from 
tree to tree.* On December 23, Model told me that the offensive had 
definitely failed— but that Hitler had ordered it to continue. 

* In my travel report, December 31, 1944, 1 wrote to Hitler: 

Vehicles must move at night without headlights. Since all daytime travel is un- 
safe and nighttime travel is slow, our troop movements amount to only one-half to 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 418 

Up to the end of December, I stayed in the area of the offensive, 
visited various divisions, was under fire from low-flying planes and 
artillery, and saw the ghastly consequences of a German attack on a 
machine-gun position. Hundreds of our soldiers lay sprawled in a small 
area; they had simply been mowed down. Late that evening I visited 
Sepp Dietrich, a former sergeant in the old German army, now com- 
mander of an SS armored force. He had set up headquarters in the 
vicinity of the Belgian border town of Houffalize. One of the few Old 
Fighters of the early days of the party, in his own plain fashion he too 
had parted ways psychologically with Hitler. Our conversation soon 
turned to the latest batch of commands. Hitler had decreed with in- 
creasing insistence that encircled Bastogne be taken "at any cost." He 
refused to understand, Sepp Dietrich grumbled, that even the elite divi- 
sions of the SS could not effortlessly overrun the Americans. It was 
impossible to convince Hitler that these were tough opponents, soldiers 
as good as our own men. "Besides," he added, "we are receiving no am- 
munition. The supply routes have been cut by the air attacks." 

As if to illustrate our helplessness, our nocturnal talk was interrupted 
by a low-level attack from huge four-motored bomber formations. Howl- 
ing and exploding bombs, clouds illuminated in red and yellow hues, 
droning motors, and no defense anywhere— I was stunned by this scene 
of military impotence which Hitlers military miscalculations had given 
such a grotesque setting. 

Protected by darkness, I left Dietrich's headquarters at four o'clock 
in the morning of December 31 and drove off with Manfred von Poser, 
my liaison officer to the General Staff. It took us until two o'clock the 
following morning to reach Hitler's headquarters. Again and again we 
had to seek cover from fighter planes. It had taken us twenty-two hours 
to cover a distance of little more than two hundred miles. 

Hitler's western headquarters, from which he had directed the Ar- 
dennes offensive, was at one end of a solitary grassy valley near Bad 
Nauheim, a mile northwest of Ziegenberg. Hidden in woods, camouflaged 
as blockhouses, the bunkers had the same massive ceilings and walls 
as all the other places at which Hitler stayed. 

Three times since my appointment as a minister I had tried to de- 



one-third of the enemy movements, even when the roads on our side are as good as 
theirs. The enemy can maneuver in broad daylight and with lights on at night. 
An additional serious obstacle, especially to bringing up supplies, is the condition 
of the roads in the Eifel region and the Ardennes. . . . Most of the highways 
have rises and curves which make them as difficult to traverse as Alpine roads. . . . 
The combat strategy handed down from above, and the resultant orders, do not 
always take these severe supply difficulties into account. In all the planning the 
question of supplies seems to take second place. . . . But if supplying has not been 
properly calculated and provided for, the operation is doomed. 



419 ) The Plunge 

liver my New Year's wishes to Hitler personally, and each time some- 
thing thwarted my intention. In 1943 it had been die icing of an airplane, 
in 1944 motor damage on the flight from the coast of the Arctic Ocean 
when I was returning from the front. 

Two hours of this year of 1945 had passed when I at last, after 
passing through many barriers, arrived in Hitler's private bunker. I had 
not come too late: adjutants, doctors, secretaries, Bormann— the whole 
circle except for the generals attached to the Fuehrers headquarters, 
were gathered around Hitler drinking champagne. The alcohol had re- 
laxed everyone, but the atmosphere was still subdued. Hitler seemed to 
be the only one in the company who was drunk without having taken 
any stimulating beverage. He was in the grip of a permanent euphoria. 

Although the beginning of a new year in no way dispelled the 
desperate situation of the year past, there seemed to be a general feeling 
of thankfulness that we could begin anew at least on the calendar. Hitler 
made optimistic forecasts for 1945. The present low point would soon 
be overcome, he said; in the end we would be victorious. The circle took 
these prophesies in silence. Only Bormann enthusiastically seconded 
Hitler. After more than two hours, during which Hitler spread around 
his credulous optimism, his followers, including myself, were transported 
in spite of all their skepticism into a more sanguine state. His magnetic 
gifts were still operative. For it was no longer possible to produce con- 
viction by rational arguments. We ought to have come to our senses when 
Hitler drew the parallel between our situation and that of Frederick 
the Great at the end of the Seven Years' War, for the implication was 
that we faced utter military defeat. 4 But none of us drew this conclusion. 

Three days later, in a grand conference with Keitel, Bormann, and 
Goebbels, we were given a further dose of unrealistic hopes. Now a 
levSe en masse was to bring about the turnaround. Goebbels became 
insulting when I spoke up against this; I argued that total conscription 
would strike our remaining programs to such an extent that it would be 
equivalent to the total collapse of whole industries. 5 Dismayed and in- 
dignant, Goebbels stared at me. Then, turning to Hitler, he cried out 
solemnly: "Then, Herr Speer, you bear the historic guilt for the loss of 
the war for the lack of a few hundred thousand soldiers! Why don t you 
say yes for once! Consider it! Your fault!" For a moment we all stood 
there fretful, stony, indecisive— then Hitler decided in favor of Goebbels 
and winning the war. 

This conversation was followed by an armaments discussion in which 
Goebbels and his state secretary, Naumann, sat in as Hitler's guests. 
As had been common lately, Hitler passed me over in the course of the 
discussion; he did not ask my opinion but turned only to Saur. I was 
cast in the role of a mute listener. After the conference Goebbels re- 
marked to me that it had struck him as strange to see with what indif- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 42O 

ference I let Saur push me aside. But all that was involved by now was 
empty talk. The failure of the Ardennes offensive meant that the war 
was over. What followed was only the occupation of Germany, delayed 
somewhat by a confused and impotent resistance. 

I was not the only one who avoided such tussles. An air of general 
indifference had overcome headquarters. It could not be explained solely 
as the result of lethargy, overwork, and Hitler s psychological influence. 
Instead of the violent clashes, the tensions of the preceding years and 
months among numerous hostile interests, groups, and cliques fighting 
for Hitler's favor and trying to shift the responsibility for the more and 
more frequent defeats, there now prevailed a disinterested silence which 
was in itself an anticipation of the end. When, for example, during this 
period Saur succeeded in having Himmler replaced by General Buhle 
as chief of armaments for the army,* it was hardly commented on, al- 
though it meant a loss of power for Himmler. There was no real atmos- 
phere of work any longer. Whatever was happening made no impression, 
since everything was overshadowed by awareness of the inexorable end. 

My trip to the front had kept me away from Berlin for more than 
three weeks— but in fact it was no longer possible to govern from the 
capital. The chaotic conditions everywhere made central guidance of 
the armaments organization more and more complicated— and also more 
and more meaningless. 

On January 12, the great Soviet offensive in the East, which Guderian 
had predicted, finally began. Our defensive line collapsed along a broad 
front. Even the more than two thousand modern German tanks which 
were standing still in the West could no longer have countered the 
superiority of the Soviet troops at this point. 

A few days afterward we were standing around in the so-called 
Ambassadors' Room at the Chancellery, a tapestried anteroom to Hitler's 
main office, waiting for the situation conference to begin. When Gu- 
derian arrived— he had been delayed by a call on Japanese Ambassador 
Oshima— an orderly in a plain black-and-white SS uniform opened the 
door to Hitler s office. We walked across the heavy, handwoven rug to 
the map table by the windows. The huge table top, a single slab of 
marble, had come from Austria; it was blood-red, striated with the 
beige and white cross sections of an ancient coral reef. We took our 
positions on the window side; Hitler sat facing us. 

The German army in Courland was hopelessly cut off. Guderian 

* Fuhrerprotokoll, January 3-5, 1944, Point 24. Saur had repeatedly protested 
to Hitler that Himmler's deputy, SS Obergruppenfiihrer Jiittner, kept interfering with 
the system of self -responsibility we had established for industry. When he heard the 
details, Hider was so angry that he had Himmler replaced. 



42i ) The Plunge 

tried to convince Hitler that this position should be abandoned and 
the army transported across the Baltic Sea. Hitler disagreed, as he 
always did when asked to authorize a retreat. Guderian did not give 
in, Hitler insisted, the tone sharpened, and finally Guderian opposed 
Hitler with an openness unprecedented in this circle. Probably fired 
by the effects of the drinks he had had at Oshima's, he threw aside 
all inhibitions. With flashing eyes and the hairs of his mustache literally 
standing on end, he stood facing Hitler across the marble table. Hitler, 
too, had risen to his feet. 

"It's simply our duty to save these people, and we still have time 
to remove them!" Guderian cried out in a challenging voice. 

Infuriated, Hitler retorted: "You are going to fight on there. We 
cannot give up these areas!" 

Guderian held firm: "But it's useless to sacrifice men in this sense- 
less way," he shouted. "It's high time! We must evacuate those soldiers 
at once!" 

What no one had thought possible now happened. Hitler appeared 
visibly intimidated by this assault. Strictly speaking, he really could 
not tolerate this insubordination, which was more a matter of Guderian's 
tone than his argument. But to my astonishment Hitler shifted to mili- 
tary arguments, maintaining that a withdrawal to the ports was bound 
to result in general disorganization and even higher losses than con- 
tinuing the defense. Once again Guderian vigorously pointed out that 
every tactical detail of the retreat had already been worked out and 
that carrying out the operation was quite possible. But Hitler stuck to 
his decision. 

Was this clash the symptom of disintegrating authority? Hitler 
had still had the last word. No one had stalked out of the room. No one 
had declared that he could no longer assume the responsibility for what 
was coming. This was why Hitler's authority remained fundamentally 
intact, after all— although for a few minutes we had literally been 
numbed by this violation of the court tone. Zeitzler had voiced his ob- 
jections more moderately; in his voice, even while contradicting Hitler, 
traces of veneration and loyalty had remained. But for the first time mat- 
ters had come to an open quarrel in the larger circle. The novelty was 
almost palpable. New worlds had opened out. To be sure, Hitler had still 
saved face. That was a great deal. But at the same time it was very little. 

In the face of the rapid advance of the Soviet armies it seemed 
to me advisable to travel to the Silesian industrial area once more to 
make sure that my orders for the preservation of the industries were 
not being undermined by local authorities. On January 21, 1945, I went 
to Oppeln and met Field Marshal Schorner, newly appointed com- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 422 

mander of the army group which, as he informed me, existed in name 
only. Their tanks and heavy weapons had been destroyed or captured 
in the course of a lost battle. No one knew how far the Russians were 
from Oppeln. In any case, the headquarters officers were leaving; in 
our hotel only a few overnight guests remained behind. 

In my room hung an etching by Kathe Kollwitz: La Carmagnole. 
It showed a yowling mob dancing with hate-contorted faces around a 
guillotine. Off to one side a weeping woman cowered on the ground. 

In the desperate situation of a war rolling rapidly to its end, I was 
gripped by increasing anxieties. The weird figures of the etching haunted 
my fitful sleep. Obsessive notions of my own terrible end, repressed by day 
or smothered in activity, came to the surface. Would the populace rise 
in fury and disappointment against its former leaders and kill them 
as in La Carmagnole? Friends and close acquaintances sometimes talked 
about our own dark futures. Milch usually declared firmly that the 
enemy would make short work of the leadership of the Third Reich. 
I shared his view. 

A telephone call from Colonel von Below, my liaison man to Hitler, 
startled me out of the torments of that night. The previous week I had 
urgently pointed out to Hitler that since the Ruhr had now been cut 
off from the rest of the Reich, the loss of Upper Silesia would neces- 
sarily bring about rapid economic collapse. In a teletype message on 
January 21, I had again called Hitler's attention to the importance of 
Upper Silesia and asked permission to ship "at least 30 to 50 percent of 
the January production" to Schorner's army group. 6 

The purpose of this message was also to support Guderian, who 
was still trying to persuade Hitler to stop the offensive efforts in the 
West and throw the few still functioning armored forces into the breach 
in the East. At the same time I had pointed out that the Russian enemy 
was "carrying out his supply tasks in close formation, visible from a 
great distance in the present snowy landscape. Since the commitment 
of the German fighter planes in the West is yielding hardly any tangi- 
ble results, it might be good to apply this weapon concentratedly here, 
where it is still highly esteemed." Below reported that Hitler, with a 
sarcastic smile, had declared my remark was to the point but had 
issued no orders. Did Hitler think that his real enemy lay in the West? 
Did he feel solidarity with, let alone sympathy for, Stalin's regime? I re- 
called a good many earlier remarks of his which could possibly be in- 
terpreted in that sense and which might be seen as the motivation for 
his conduct at this time. 

The next day I tried to continue my journey to Kattowitz, the center 
of the Silesian industrial region, but I never got there. Rounding a curve 
on the sheet-ice road, I collided with a heavy truck. My chest had crushed 
the steering wheel and even twisted the steering column, and I sat, gasp- 



423 ) The Plunge 

ing for air, on the steps of a village tavern, pale and distraught. "You 
look like a cabinet minister after a lost war," Poser said wryly. The car 
was out of commission; an ambulance took me back. When I was on my 
feet again I was at least able to find out by telephone from my assistants 
in Kattowitz that all the arrangements we had made were being carried 
out 

On the ride back to Berlin, Hanke, the Breslau Gauleiter, showed 
me through the party headquarters, a building by the great architect 
Schinkel which had recently been renovated. "The Russians will never 
get their hands on this," he exclaimed emotionally. Td rather burn it 
down." I remonstrated, but Hanke insisted. He didn't give a damn about 
Breslau if it were about to fall into the enemy's hands, he said. But 
finally I succeeded in convincing him of the artistic importance of at 
least this building and in talking him out of his vandalism.* 

Back in Berlin, I tried to show Hitler some of the innumerable 
photos I had taken during my trip of the miseries of the refugees. I had 
the vague hope that the pictures of these fugitives— women, children, 
and old men, trudging painfully toward a wretched fate in the bitter 
cold— might stir Hitler to pity. I thought I might be able to persuade him 
at least to stem the advance of the Russians by sending some troops from 
the West. But when I presented the pictures to Hitler, he roughly pushed 
them aside. It was impossible to tell whether they no longer interested 
him or affected him too deeply. 

On January 24, 1945, Guderian sought out Foreign Minister Ribben- 
trop. He explained the military situation to him and declared bluntly that 
the war was lost. Ribbentrop hemmed and hawed, and tried to slide 
out of the affair by informing Hitler at once, with an expression of as- 
tonishment, that the chief of staff had formed his own opinion of the 
military situation. Two hours later at the situation conference Hitler 
spluttered that any defeatist statements of this sort would be punished 
with the greatest severity. Each of his assistants, he said, was at liberty 
to speak to him directly. "I most emphatically forbid generalizations and 
conclusions in regard to the whole situation. That remains my affair. 
In the future anyone who tells anyone else that the war is lost will be 
treated as a traitor, with all the consequences for him and his family. 
I will take action without regard to rank and prestige!" 

No one dared say a word. We had listened silently; just as silently 
we left the room. From now on an additional guest frequently appeared 
at the situation conferences. He kept in the background, but his presence 

* But not for long: A few months later he waged the battle of Breslau without 
regard for human lives or historic buildings and even had his old friend, the mayor, 
Dr. Spielhagen, publicly hanged. Then, as I heard from the designer Flettner, shortly 
before the surrender of Breslau he flew out of the besieged city in one of the few 
existing prototype helicopters. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 424 

alone was exceedingly effective. He was Ernst Kaltenbrunner, the Ges- 
tapo chief. 

In view of Hitler's threats and his increasing unpredictability, on 
January 27, 1945, I sent the three hundred most important members of 
my Industry Organization a concluding report on our armaments work 
during the past three years. I also called together my former associates 
in my architectural work and asked them to collect photographs of our 
designs and store them in safe places. I had little time to spare, nor did 
I want to bare my feelings and my cares to them. But they understood: 
This was my farewell to the past. 

On January 30, 1945, I had von Below, my liaison officer, hand 
Hitler a memorandum. By sheer chance, the date it bore was the twelfth 
anniversary of his taking power. Realistically, I declared that the war 
was over in the area of heavy industry and armaments and, given this 
situation, food, household heating, and electricity should have priority 
over tanks, airplane motors, and ammunition. 

To finally dampen Hitlers wild dreams of future armaments achieve- 
ments in 1945, I included a chart of the scanty production of tanks, ord- 
nance, and ammunition to be expected in the next three months. The 
memorandum concluded: "After the loss of Upper Silesia, the German 
armaments industry will no longer be able even approximately to cover 
the requirements of the front for ammunition, ordnance, and tanks. . . . 
From now on the material preponderance of the enemy can no longer 
be compensated for by the bravery of our soldiers." Hitler had again 
and again asserted that our lacks would be balanced out by miracles of 
courage from the moment the German soldier was fighting on German 
soil for the possession of his native land. My memorandum was intended 
as a reply to this theory. 

After receiving this memorandum, Hitler ignored me and even pre- 
tended not to notice my presence during the situation conference. But 
on February 1 he finally summoned me, ordering that Saur come along 
also. After everything that had passed I was prepared for an unpleasant 
clash. But the very fact that he received us in his private study in the 
Chancellery residence indicated that I was not a candidate for the pun- 
ishment he had threatened for "defeatism." He did not make Saur and 
me stand, as was his habit when he wanted to show his anger, but 
very pleasantly offered us the upholstered easy chairs. Then, he turned 
to Saur, his voice sounding tense. He seemed constrained; I sensed an 
embarrassed attempt simply to overlook my opposition and to talk about 
the everyday problems of armaments manufacture. In a determinedly 
calm manner he discussed the possibilities of the next few months. Saur, 
by mentioning favorable factors, tried to offset the depressing tone of 
my memorandum. Hitler's optimism did not seem entirely unfounded. 



425 ) The Plunge 

After all, my forecasts had quite often proved mistaken during the past 
years, since the enemy rarely proceeded with the consistency on which 
my calculations were based. 

I sat by sulkily, without participating in the dialogue. It was only 
toward the end that Hitler turned to me: "You are perfectly entitled to 
let me know your estimate of the armaments situation, but I forbid you 
to convey such information to anyone else. You are also not permitted 
to give anyone a copy of this memorandum. But as for your last para- 
graph"— at this point his voice became cool and cutting— you cannot 
write that sort of thing to me. You might have spared yourself the trouble 
of such conclusions. You are to leave to me the conclusions I draw from 
the armaments situation." He said all this very softly, without any sign 
of excitement, whistling somewhat between his teeth. The effect was 
not only much more definite but far more dangerous than one of his 
furies, for whatever he said in a rage could easily be taken back next 
day. Here, I felt quite distinctly, I was hearing Hitler's last word on the 
subject. Then he dismissed us. He was curt to me, cordial to Saur. 

On January 30, I had already had Poser send out six copies of the 
memorandum to six departments of the army General Staff. To comply 
formally with Hitler's order, I asked to have these returned. Hitler told 
Guderian and others that he had placed the memorandum in the safe 
unread. 

I promptly began preparing still another report. Saur, I knew, ba- 
sically shared my views of the armaments situation. I decided that this 
time Saur was to write and sign the report, that this was the only way to 
make him declare himself. It indicates my nervousness at the time that 
I had our conference take place secretly in Bernau where Dieter Stahl, 
who was in charge of our ammunition production, owned a factory. Each 
of the participants at this conference agreed that Saur must be made to 
send in a report which echoed my declaration of bankruptcy. 

Saur writhed like an eel. He would not venture as far as a written 
statement, but he did finally agree to confirm my pessimistic forecast 
at our next conference with Hitler. But the next meeting with Hitler 
ran its usual course. As soon as I finished my report, Saur began trying 
to balance out the somber note I had struck. He spoke of a recent 
consultation with Messerschmitt and drew some first sketches of a new 
four-motored jet bomber from his briefcase. Although building a plane 
with a range sufficient to reach New York would have taken years even 
under normal conditions, Hitler and Saur went into raptures over the 
dire psychological effects of an air raid upon the skyscraper canyons of 
New York. 

During February and March of 1945, Hitler occasionally hinted that 
he was contacting the enemy by various means, but he would never go 
into details. My impression was that he was trying to create an atmos- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 426 

phere of utter irreconcilability which left no roads open. At the time 
of the Yalta Conference, I heard him giving instructions to Lorenz, the 
press secretary. He was dissatisfied with the reaction of the German 
newspapers and demanded a sharper, more aggressive tone: "Those 
warmongers in Yalta must be denounced— so insulted and attacked that 
they will have no chance to make an offer to the German people. Under 
no circumstances must there be an offer. That gang only wants to separate 
the German people from their leadership. I've always said: Surrender 
is absolutely out of the question!" He hesitated: "History is not going 
to be repeated!" In his last radio address Hitler took up this idea and 
assured "these other statesmen once and for all that every attempt to 
influence National Socialist Germany by empty phrases of the Wilsonian 
type presumes a naivete that is foreign to present-day Germany." The 
only one who could release him from his duty of uncompromisingly repre- 
senting the interests of his people, he continued, was he who had ap- 
pointed him. He meant the "Almighty," to whom he repeatedly alluded 
in this speech. 7 

During the years of military victory Hitler had associated largely 
with the circle of generals around him. With the approaching end of 
his rule he visibly withdrew into that intimate clique of old party mem- 
bers with whom he had launched out on his career. Night after night he 
sat with Goebbels, Ley, and Bormann for a few hours. No one was ad- 
mitted to these gatherings; no one knew what they were talking about, 
whether they were reminiscing about their beginnings or talking about 
the end and what would come after it. I listened in vain for at least a 
single feeling remark about the future of the defeated nation. They 
grasped at every straw, made much of even the vaguest signs of a turn- 
ing point; yet they were in no way prepared to regard the fate of the 
entire nation as nearly so important as their own. "We will leave nothing 
but a desert to the Americans, English, and Russians"— this was the stand- 
ard close to any discussion of the matter. Hitler agreed, although he did 
not express himself in such radical terms as Goebbels, Bormann, and 
Ley. Actually, a few weeks later it turned out that Hitler was more radi- 
cal than any of them. While the others were talking, he concealed his 
attitude behind a pose of statesmanship, but it was he who issued the 
orders for smashing the foundation of the nation s existence. 

At a situation conference early in February the maps showed the 
catastrophic picture of innumerable breakthroughs and encirclements. 
I drew Doenitz aside: "Something must be done, you know." 

Doenitz replied with unwonted curtness: "I am here only to repre- 
sent the navy. The rest is none of my business. The Fuehrer must know 
what he is doing." 



427 ) The Plunge 

It is significant that the group who gathered day after day around 
the map table, facing a Hitler who sat there exhausted and obstinate, 
never considered taking any joint action. Undoubtedly Goering had long 
since become corrupt and increasingly unnerved. Nevertheless, from the 
day the war broke out he had been one of the few persons who saw, 
realistically and without illusions, the fundamental change which Hitler 
had wrought by bringing on the war. If Goering, as the second man in 
the state, had joined with Keitel, Jodl, Doenitz, Guderian, and me in 
presenting Hitler with an ultimatum, if we had demanded to know his 
plans for ending the war, Hitler would have been forced to declare him- 
self. But Hitler had always shied away from confrontations of this sort. 
And now he could less than ever afford to give up this fiction of a unani- 
mous leadership. 

Around the middle of February, I called on Goering one evening in 
Karinhall. I had discovered from studying the military map that he had 
concentrated his parachute division around his hunting estate. For a 
long time he had been made the scapegoat for all the failures of the 
Luftwaffe. At the situation conferences Hitler habitually denounced him 
in the most violent and insulting language before the assembled officers. 
He must have been even nastier in the scenes he had with Goering pri- 
vately. Often, waiting in the anteroom, I could hear Hitler shouting at 
him. 

That evening in Karinhall, I established a certain intimacy with 
Goering for the first and only time. Goering had an excellent Rothschild- 
Lafite served at the fireplace and ordered the servant not to disturb us. 
Candidly, I described my disappointment with Hitler. Just as candidly, 
Goering replied that he well understood me and that he often felt much 
the same. However, he said, it was easier for me, since I had joined 
Hitler a great deal later and could free myself from him all the sooner. 
He, Goering, had much closer ties with Hitler; many years of common 
experiences and struggles had bound them together— and he could no 
longer break loose. 

A few days later Hitler shifted the parachute division concentrated 
around Karinhall to the front south of Berlin. 

At this time a high-ranking SS leader hinted to me that Himmler 
was preparing decisive steps. In February 1945, the Reichsfuhrer-SS had 
assumed command of the Vistula Army Group, but he was no better 
than his predecessor at stopping the Russian advance. Hitler was now 
berating him also. Thus what personal prestige Himmler had retained 
was used up by a few weeks of commanding frontline troops. 

Nevertheless, everyone still feared Himmler, and I felt distinctly 
shaky one day on learning that Himmler was coming to see me about 
something that evening. This, incidentally, was the only time he ever 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 428 

called on me. My nervousness grew when Theodor Hupfauer, the new 
chief of our Central Office— with whom I had several times spoken rather 
candidly— told me in some trepidation that Gestapo chief Kaltenbrunner 
would be calling on him at the same hour. 

Before Himmler entered, my adjutant whispered to me: "He's alone." 
My office was without window panes; we no longer bothered re- 
placing them, since they were blasted out by bombs every few days. 
A wretched candle stood on the table; the electricity was out again. 
Wrapped in our coats, we sat facing one another. Himmler talked about 
minor matters, asked about pointless details, spoke of the situation at the 
front, and finally made the witless observation: "When the course is 
downhill there's always a floor to the valley, and once that is reached, 
Herr Speer, the ascent begins again." 

Since I expressed neither agreement nor disagreement with this 
proverbial wisdom and remained virtually monosyllabic throughout the 
conversation, he soon took his leave. I never found out what he wanted 
of it, or why Kaltenbrunner had called on Hupfauer at the same time. 
Perhaps they had heard about my critical attitude and were seeking 
allies; perhaps they merely wanted to sound us out. 

On February 14, I sent a letter to the Finance Minister offering 
to turn over "the entire sizable increase of my personal fortune since 
the year 1933 for the benefit of the Reich." This action was intended 
to help stabilize the mark, whose value had been maintained with dif- 
ficulty only by coercive measures and which would inevitably collapse 
as soon as the coercion ended. When the Finance Minister, Count 
Schwerin-Krosigk, discussed my offer with Goebbels, he encountered 
eloquent opposition. The Propaganda Minister would have been par- 
ticularly affected had he felt under pressure to imitate my example. 

Another idea of mine had even smaller prospects of adoption. Re- 
calling it today makes me aware of the romantic and fantastic state of 
mind I was in during that period. At the end of January, I discussed 
the hopelessness of the situation very cautiously, feeling my way, with 
Werner Naumann, state secretary in the Propaganda Ministry. The con- 
versation arose by chance; we happened to find ourselves together in the 
Ministry air-raid shelter. Assuming that at least Goebbels was capable 
of lucidity and logic, I sketched the outlines of a grand final stroke. 
What I had in mind was a joint undertaking by the government, the 
party, and the commanding generals. Hitler would issue a proclamation 
that the entire leadership of the Reich was prepared to surrender vol- 
untarily to the enemy if in return the German people would be granted 
bearable conditions for their continued existence. Reminiscences of his- 
tory, memories of Napoleon who had surrendered to the British after 
the collapse at Waterloo, were mingled in this rather operatic notion 



429 ) The Plunge 

with Wagnerianisms about self-sacrifice and redemption. It was good 
that nothing ever came of it 

Among my associates recruited from industry, Dr. Liischen, head of 
the German electric industry, member of the board of directors and 
chief of research and development in the Siemens concern, was particu- 
larly close to me personally. He was a man of seventy on whose experi- 
ence I gladly leaned. He foresaw difficult times for the German people 
but had no doubts about eventual recovery. 

Early in February, Liischen visited me in my small apartment in 
the rear building of my Ministry on Pariser Platz. He took a slip of paper 
from his pocket and handed it to me, saying: "Are you aware of the 
passage from Hitlers Mein Kampf that is most often quoted by the 
public nowadays?" 

I read: "The task of diplomacy is to ensure that a nation does not 
heroically go to its destruction but is practically preserved. Every way 
that leads to this end is expedient, and a failure to follow it must be 
called criminal neglect of duty." He had found a second fitting quotation, 
Liischen continued, and he handed me another slip: "State authority as 
an end in itself cannot exist, since in that case every tyranny on this 
earth would be sacred and unassailable. If a racial entity is being led 
toward its doom by means of governmental power, then the rebellion of 
every single member of such a Volk is not only a right, but a duty." 8 

Liischen took his departure without a word, leaving these quota- 
tions behind. Uneasily, I paced back and forth in my room. Here was 
Hitler himself saying what I had been trying to get across during these 
past months. Only the conclusion remained to be drawn: Hitler himself— 
measured by the standards of his own political program— was deliberately 
committing high treason against his own people, which had made vast 
sacrifices for his cause and to which he owed everything. Certainly more 
than I owed to Hitler. 

That night I came to the decision to eliminate Hitler. My prepara- 
tions, to be sure, went no further than the initial stages and therefore 
have a touch of the ridiculous about them. But at the same time they 
are evidence of the nature of the regime and of the deformations in the 
character of its actors. To this day I shudder at the thought of what that 
regime had led me to— I who had once wanted nothing more than to be 
Hitler s master builder. Even at this late date I still occasionally sat 
opposite him at table, occasionally even leafed through old building plans 
with him— all the while I was thinking how to obtain poison gas to 
destroy the man who in spite of our many disagreements still felt some 
liking for me and treated me with more forbearance than he did anyone 
else. For years I had lived in his entourage, where a human life meant 
nothing; but all that seemed to be none of my affair. Now I realized 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 430 

that this atmosphere had not left me untouched. I was not just entangled 
in a thicket of deceptions, intrigues, baseness, and killing. I myself had 
become part of this perverted world. For twelve years, when you came 
right down to it, I had lived thoughtlessly among murderers. Now, at 
the moment of the regime's doom, I was on the point of receiving from 
Hitler himself, of all people, the moral impulse to attempt murder against 
him. 

At the Nuremberg Trial, Goering ridiculed me and called me a 
second Brutus. Several of the defendants reproached me with: "You 
broke the oath you swore to the Fuehrer." But this appeal to the oath 
was empty; it was simply a way to escape the obligation to think inde- 
pendently. If nothing else, Hitler himself robbed this sham argument of 
its rationale, as he did for me in February 1945. 

On my walks in the Chancellery gardens I had noticed the ventilation 
shaft for Hitler's bunker. Camouflaged by a small shrub, level with the 
ground and covered with a thin grating, was the opening of the air in- 
take. The air that was drawn in passed through a filter. But no filter 
worked against our poison gas tabun. 

Chance had brought me into closer personal relations with the head 
of our munitions production, Dieter Stahl. The Gestapo had questioned 
him about a defeatist remark on the impending end of the war. The pen- 
alties were all too serious. He had asked my help. Since I knew Gauleiter 
Stiirtz of Brandenburg quite well, I was able to quash the affair. 

About the middle of February, a few days after Liischen's visit, I was 
sitting with Stahl in a small room in our Berlin air-raid shelter. Outside, 
a heavy air raid was in progress. The situation promoted candid conver- 
sation. In that dreary room with its concrete walls, steel door, and plain 
chairs, we talked about conditions in the Chancellery and the catastrophic 
policy being pursued there. At one point in our talk, Stahl gripped my 
arm and exclaimed: "It's going to be frightful, frightful!" 

I began discreetly asking about the new poison gas and whether he 
could obtain it. Although the question was extremely unusual, Stahl an- 
swered readily enough. There was a pause in the conversation. I found 
myself saying: "It is the only way to bring the war to an end. I want to 
try to conduct the gas into the Chancellery bunker." 

In spite of the confidential relationship that had arisen between us, 
I was myself shocked by my own frankness. But Stahl showed no signs 
of either consternation or excitement. Soberly, he promised that in the next 
few days he would look around for ways to obtain the gas. 

A few days later Stahl told me that he had got in touch with the head 
of the munitions department in the Army Ordnance Office, Major Soyka. 
Perhaps, he had said, there were ways of rebuilding artillery shells, which 
were made in Stahl's factory, for poison-gas experiments. Actually, every 



43i ) The Plunge 

medium-level employee in the poison-gas factories had easier access to 
tabun than the Minister of Armaments or the chief of the Directing Com- 
mittee for Munitions. In the course of our discussions, it turned out that 
tabun became effective only after an explosion. This made it impracticable 
for my purpose, for an explosion would have shattered the thin-walled air 
ducts. By this time it was the beginning of March. But I continued to pur- 
sue my plan, for this seemed the only way to eliminate not only Hitler, 
but Bormann, Goebbels, and Ley at the same time, during one of their 
nocturnal chats. 

Stahl thought that he would soon be able to obtain one of the tradi- 
tional types of gas for me. Ever since the building of the Chancellery, I 
had been acquainted with Henschel, the chief engineer of the building. 
I suggested to him that the air filters had been in use too long and needed 
renewing; for Hitler had occasionally complained in my presence about 
the bad air in the bunker. Quickly, much more quickly than I could pos- 
sibly act, Henschel removed the filtering system, so that the bunker was 
without protection. 

But even if we could have obtained the gas immediately, those days 
would have passed fruitlessly. For when I invented some pretext at this 
time to inspect the ventilation shaft, I found a changed picture. Armed 
SS sentinels were now posted on the roofs of the entire complex, search- 
lights had been installed, and where the ventilation shaft had previously 
been at ground level there now rose a chimney more than ten feet high, 
which put the air intake out of reach. I was stunned. My first thought 
was that my plan had been discovered. But actually the whole thing was 
the operation of chance. Hitler, temporarily blinded by poison gas during 
the First World War, had ordered the building of this chimney because 
poison gas is heavier than air. 

Basically I was relieved that my plan had been finally thwarted. For 
three or four weeks more I was beset by fears that our plot might still be 
uncovered. Sometimes I became obsessed with the notion that my inten- 
tion could be read in my face. After all, since July 20, 1944, there was al- 
ways the risk that a man's family would be called to account— my wife 
and above all our six children. 

The building of the chimney had done more than ruin this particular 
plot. The whole idea of assassination vanished from my considerations 
as quickly as it had come. I no longer considered it my mission to elimi- 
nate Hitler but to frustrate his orders for destruction. That, too, relieved 
me, for all my feelings still existed side by side: attachment, rebellion, loy- 
alty, outrage. Quite aside from all question of fear, I could never have 
confronted Hitler pistol in hand. Face to face, his magnetic power over 
me was too great up to the very last day. 

The total confusion of my emotions can be seen in the fact that how- 
ever aware I was of the amorality of his conduct, I could not suppress a 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 432 

pang at his inexorable decline and at the collapse of a life built so entirely 
on self-assurance. From this point on, I felt toward him a mixture of ab- 
horrence, pity, and fascination. 

In addition I felt fear. In the middle of March, when I again had to 
send in a report dealing with the taboo subject of the lost war, I decided 
to accompany it with a personal letter. In a nervous hand, using the green 
ink which was the prerogative of a government minister, I began drafting 
it. Not entirely by hazard I wrote it on the back of the sheet on which my 
secretary had copied the quotation from Mein Kampf in the special large 
type used for communications for Hitler. By this mechanism I was trying 
to remind Hitler of his own call to rebellion in a time of lost war. 

"The enclosed memorandum," I began, "is something I have had to 
write. As Reich Minister of Armaments and War Production it is my duty 
to you and to the German people." Here I hesitated and recast the sen- 
tence, placing the German people before Hitler. Then I continued: "I 
know that this letter must necessarily have grave consequences for me 
personally." 

At this point the draft, which has been preserved, breaks off. I had 
also put a line through this sentence. In its new form, my fate is cast en- 
tirely in Hitlers hands. The change was trivial: ". . . may possibly have 
grave consequences for me personally." 



29 

Doom 



During this last stage of the war, i found distraction and relief in 
being active. I left it to Saur to worry about armaments production, which 
was winding down anyhow. 1 For my part I kept in as close touch as pos- 
sible with my industrial associates so we could discuss urgent problems 
of provisioning and of transition to a postwar economy. 

The Morgenthau Plan was made to order for Hitler and the party, 
insofar as they could point to it for proof that defeat would finally seal the 
fate of all Germans. Many people were actually influenced by this threat. 
We, on the other hand, had long since taken a different view of what lay 
in the future. For Hitler and his henchmen had pursued aims similar to 
the Morgenthau Plan, only far more drastically, in the occupied territories. 
But experience showed that in Czechoslovakia, Poland, Norway, and 
France industries had developed again, even contrary to German inten- 
tions, since the temptation to reactivate them for our own ends was greater 
than the manias of embittered ideologues. And once anyone began to re- 
vive industry, he found he had to maintain the economic fundamentals 
that underlay it, to feed and clothe people and to pay wages. 

Such, at any rate, had been the course of things in the occupied ter- 
ritories. We thought the one prerequisite for a repetition in Germany was 
that the productive mechanism should remain relatively intact. My work 
toward the end of the war, and especially after abandoning my plan to 
assassinate Hitler, was directed almost exclusively toward saving the in- 

( 433 ) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 434 

dustrial substance, in defiance of all difficulties and without ideological or 
nationalistic bias. But since this was the very reverse of official policy, it 
led me further along the course of lies, deception, and schizophrenia on 
which I had already embarked. 

At a situation conference in January 1945, Hitler handed me a foreign 
press report. "You know I ordered everything in France to be destroyed. 
How is it possible that French industry is already approaching its prewar 
production only a few months later?" He glared indignantly at me. 

"Probably it's a propaganda report," I replied calmly. Hitler knew 
all about false propaganda reports, and the affair was dismissed. 

In February 1945, I once again flew to the Hungarian petroleum 
region, to the remaining coal area of Upper Silesia which we still held, 
and to Czechoslovakia and Danzig. Everywhere I extracted pledges from 
the local representatives of my Ministry to follow our line. The generals, 
too, indicated their sympathy with my efforts. 

In the course of this journey I made an interesting observation at 
Lake Balaton in Hungary. I witnessed the open deployment of a number 
of SS divisions which Hitler intended to commit to a large-scale offensive. 
But the plan for this operation was subject to strictest secrecy. It seemed 
all the more grotesque, therefore, that these forces wore badges on their 
uniforms identifying them as elite formations. But even more grotesque 
than this open deployment for a "surprise" offensive was Hitler's belief 
that with a few armored divisions he could overthrow the newly estab- 
lished, strong position of the Soviets in the Balkans. He thought the peo- 
ples of southeastern Europe were already tired of Soviet rule after only 
a few months. In the desperate mood of these weeks he persuaded him- 
self that a few initial successes would change everything. There would 
surely be a popular uprising against the Soviet Union, and the populace 
would make common cause with us against the Bolshevik enemy, until 
victory was won. It was fantastic. 

My subsequent visit in Danzig brought me to the headquarters of 
Himmler in his capacity of Commander in Chief of the Vistula Army 
Group. The headquarters was a comfortably equipped special train. By 
chance I was present at a telephone conversation between him and Gen- 
eral Weiss, and heard Himmler cut off all arguments for abandoning a 
lost position with a stereotyped reply: "I have given you a command. 
You U answer with your head for it. Ill call you to account personally if 
the position is lost." 

But when I visited General Weiss the next day, the position had been 
abandoned in the course of the night. Weiss appeared unimpressed by 
Himmler s threats. '1 am not committing my troops for insane demands 
that cost heavy casualties. I am doing only what is possible." Hitler's and 
Himmler's threats were beginning to lose their effectiveness. On this trip, 
too, I had my Ministry photographer take pictures of the endless lines of 



435 ) Doom 

refugees trekking in mute panic toward the West. Once again Hitler re- 
fused to look at the photos. With resignation rather than vexation he 
pushed them far away from him on the large map table. 

On my trip to Upper Silesia, I met General Heinrici, a sensible man 
with whom I had to collaborate confidentially during the last weeks of 
the war. At that time, in the middle of February, we decided that the rail- 
road installations which would be needed in the future for distributing 
coal to southeast Germany were not to be destroyed. Together, we visited 
a mine near Ribnyk. Although the mine was in the immediate vicinity of 
the front, the Soviet troops were allowing work to continue there. The 
enemy, too, seemed to be respecting our policy of nondestruction. The 
Polish workers had adjusted to the change in the situation. They were 
working as efficiently as ever, in a sense repaying us for our pledge that 
we would preserve their place of work if they refrained from sabotage. 

Early in March, I went to the Ruhr for a survey of what would be 
needed for the impending end and the new beginning. The industrialists 
were most anxious about the transportation question. If the coal mines 
and steel works were preserved but all the bridges destroyed, then the 
circulation among coal, steel, and rolling mills would be broken. That 
same day I went to see Field Marshal Model about it.* He was in a state 
of fury. He told me that commands had just come from Hitler to attack 
the enemy on his flank at Remagen, using certain specified divisions, and 
recapture the bridge. "Those divisions have lost their weapons and have 
no fighting strength at all. They would be less effective than a company! 
It's the same thing all over again: At headquarters they have no idea what 
is going on. . . . Of course, I'll be blamed for the failure." In his irritation 
at Hitlers orders, Model was all the readier to listen to my proposals. He 
promised that in the fighting in the Ruhr area he would spare the indis- 
pensable bridges and especially the railroad installations. 

To forestall the blowing up of bridges, which boded so ill for the fu- 
ture, I arranged with General Guderian 2 to issue an edict on "measures of 
destruction in our own country," whose purpose was to forbid any demo- 
lition which would "hinder the supplying of our own population." Certain 
demolitions were absolutely essential, but these were to be kept to a mini- 
mum; as far as possible only minor stoppages of traffic were to be under- 
taken. Guderian meant to issue this order on his own responsibility for 
the eastern theater of war. But when he tried to persuade General Jodl, 
who was in charge of the western theater, to sign it, he was referred to 
Keitel. Keitel took possession of the draft and said he would discuss it with 
Hitler. The result could be predicted: At the next situation conference 

* That same day Model decided not to use the largest pharmaceutical plant in 
Germany, Bayer-Leverkusen, as an artillery base. He agreed to inform the enemy 
and request him to spare the factory. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 436 

Hitler made a great scene over Guderians proposal and reiterated the 
strict orders for destruction. 

In the middle of March, I sent Hitler another memorandum in which 
I again frankly expressed my opinion on the measures that must be taken 
at this stage of the war. The memorandum violated all the taboos he had 
set up in recent months, as I well knew. But only a few days before I had 
convoked my industrial associates to a meeting in Bernau and told them 
that I would risk my head to keep the factories from being demolished, 
no matter how much the military situation deteriorated. At the same time 
I once again sent out a circular letter to all my branch offices ordering 
them to avoid destruction on principle. 3 

To coax Hitler into reading my memorandum at all, the first pages 
began in the usual tone with a report on coal production. But by the sec- 
ond page I was presenting a list in which the armaments factories were 
already ranked last. I gave civilian needs precedence: food, gas, electric- 
ity.* Abruptly, the text went on to say that "the final collapse of the Ger- 
man economy" could be expected "with certainty" within four to eight 
weeks, and that afterward the war "could not be continued on the mili- 
tary plane." Then, appealing directly to Hitler, I wrote: "No one has the 
right to take the viewpoint that the fate of the German people is tied to 
his personal fate." The primary obligation of leadership in these last weeks 
of the war must be "to help the people wherever possible." I concluded 



* Weeks earlier we had already drawn up complete plans. On February 19, one 
day after Hitler ordered me by decree "to distribute all the transportation facilities 
of the armed forces, the armaments industry, agriculture, and industry among the 
prime users and to establish the order of priorities for shipments" I gave the following 
orders in my "Instructions Concerning the Transportation Situation": "Anything which 
is vital to preserving the strength of the German nation naturally takes precedence 
over everything else. As far as possible food and other necessities of life must be pro- 
vided for the population." The transportation crisis forced me to make this decision, 
since freight-car loadings had dropped to a third of the former figure. 

Thanks to the pressure exerted by Riecke, the state secretary in the Ministry of 
Food, I was able to obtain a decree from the Planning Bureau on March 2, 1945, 
allowing me to order the Bureau of Construction to provide the food-producing in- 
dustries and the farm machinery plants with electricity and coal and to have the 
nitrogen plants repaired before the hydrogenation plants. These were the last of my 
many decrees on priorities. I did not even mention the armaments industry. 

Pools of trucks which we kept in reserve for urgent armaments transports were 
provided with the necessary fuel and dispatched to deliver the seed for the next 
crops, for the state railroad had announced that it could no longer handle this task. 
During these weeks we carried out a special program to fill Berlin's warehouses with 
enough food to last for several months. A special offer I made to State Secretary 
Zintsch of the Ministry of Education was accepted, and our trucks began to move 
precious art objects from the Berlin museums to the salt caves along the Saale River. 
The objects thus saved today form the heart of the Dahlem museum's collection. 



437 ) Doom 

the memorandum: "At this stage of the war it makes no sense for us to 
undertake demolitions which may strike at the very life of the nation." 

Until then I had opposed Hitler's policy by a pretense of optimism 
in conformity with the official line, arguing that factories should not be 
destroyed because we would want to put them back in operation quickly 
after the reconquest. Now, on the contrary, I declared for the first time 
that the material substance of the nation had to be preserved "even if a 
reconquest does not seem possible. ... It cannot possibly be the purpose 
of warfare at home to destroy so many bridges that, given the straitened 
means of the postwar period, it will take years to rebuild this transporta- 
tion network. . . . Their destruction means eliminating all further possi- 
bility for the German people to survive/'* 

I did not dare hand this memorandum to Hitler without preparation. 
He was too unpredictable, and an instant order to have me shot was quite 
conceivable. I therefore gave the twenty-two-page document to Colonel 
von Below, my liaison officer at the Fuehrer's headquarters, with instruc- 
tions first to summarize it for him at a suitable moment. Then I requested 
Julius Schaub, Hitler's adjutant, to tell Hitler that I would like to have 
a photograph of him with a personal dedication for my impending for- 
tieth birthday. I was the only close associate of Hitler's who had not asked 
him for such a photograph during the entire twelve years. Now, at the 
end of his rule and of our personal relationship, I wanted to let him know 
that although I was opposing him and had had to face up to the fact of 
defeat, I still revered him and valued the distinction of a dedicated photo- 
graph. 

Still I was apprehensive and took steps to put myself out of his reach 
immediately after handing over the memorandum. That same night I 
planned to fly to Konigsberg, already threatened by the Soviet armies. I 
was to have a conference with my assistants there, where I would again 
urge my plea against needless demolitions. At the same time, I thought, 
I would bid Hitler farewell. 

And so on the evening of March 18, 1 went to the situation conference 
with my fateful document. For some time the conferences had no longer 

* In this memorandum I used Berlin as an example of what would happen if 
bridges were blown up: "The planned demolition of the bridges in Berlin would cut 
off the city's food supply, and industrial production and human life in this city would 
be rendered impossible for years to come. Such demolitions would mean the death 
of Berlin." I also pointed out to Hitler the consequences for the Ruhr area: "If the 
numerous railroad bridges over the smaller canals and valleys, or the viaducts, are 
blown up, the Ruhr area will be unable to handle even the production needed for 
repairing the bridges." In my March 15 memorandum, I also demanded of Hitler 
that preparations be made so that when the enemy approached only a code word 
need be issued to assure that civilian and army stocks, including food stocks, would 
immediately be distributed among the people. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 438 

been taking place in Hitler's resplendent office, which I had designed 
seven years ago. Hitler had transferred them to his small study in the deep 
shelter. With melancholy bitterness he commented to me: "Ah, you know, 
Herr Speer, your beautiful architecture no longer provides the proper 
frame for the situation conferences." 

The subject of the March 18 conference was the defense of the Saar, 
now hard pressed by Patton's army. As he had done once before in the 
case of the Russian manganese mines, Hitler suddenly turned to me for 
support: "Tell the gentlemen yourself what a loss of the Saar coal will 
mean to you!" 

Completely off my guard, I blurted out: "That would only speed up 
the collapse." Stunned and embarrassed, we stared at each other. I was 
just as surprised as Hitler. After an awkward silence, Hitler changed the 
subject. 

That same day Field Marshal Kesselring, the Commander in Chief 
in the West, reported that the populace was playing a negative role in 
the struggle against the advancing American forces. More and more often 
the people did not allow our own troops to enter the villages. Deputations 
would go to the officers to beg them not to cause the destruction of locali- 
ties by defending them. In many cases the troops had yielded to these 
desperate pleas. 

Without a moment's compunction, Hitler turned to Keitel and told 
him to compose an order to the Commander in Chief and the Gauleiters: 
The entire population of the threatened areas was to be forcibly evacu- 
ated. Dutifully, Keitel sat down at a table in the corner to draw up the 
order. 

One of the generals present tried to persuade Hitler that it was im- 
possible to carry out the evacuation of hundreds of thousands of persons. 
There were no longer any trains available. Transportation had long since 
broken down completely. Hitler remained obdurate. "Then let them walk!" 
he replied. That, too, could not be organized, the general said. Provision- 
ing would be needed; the torrent of humanity would have to be led 
through less populated areas; and besides the people did not even have 
proper shoes. He was not given a chance to finish. Imperviously, Hitler 
turned away. 

Keitel had drafted the order and read it to Hitler, who approved it. 
Its text ran: 

The presence of the population in the battle zone threatened by the 
enemy imposes difficulties upon the fighting troops, as it does on the popula- 
tion itself. The Fuehrer therefore issues the following command: West of the 
Rhine, or in the Saar Palatinate, as the case may be, all inhabitants are to be 
evacuated at once from the area, beginning directly behind the main battle- 
field. . . . Removal is to take place in a general southeasterly direction and 



439 ) Doom 

south of the line formed by St. Wendel, Kaiserslautern, and Ludwigshafen. 
Details to be settled by Army Group G in association with the Gauleiters. 
The Gauleiters will receive the same order from the Chief of the Party Sec- 
retariat. Chief OKW (signed), Field Marshal Keitel.* 

No one objected when Hitler concluded: "We can no longer afford to 
concern ourselves with the population." Together with Zander, Bormann s 
liaison man to Hitler, I left the room. Zander was in despair. "But that's 
impossible. It will be an utter disaster. No preparations have been made!" 

Impulsively, I said that I would give up my flight to Konigsberg and 
drive west that very night to see what I could do to help. 

The situation conference was over, it was past midnight, and my 
fortieth birthday had begun. I asked Hitler whether I might see him for 
a moment. He called his orderly: "Bring that picture I've signed," and 
handed me, with cordial birthday wishes, the red leather case stamped 
with the Fuehrers emblem: This was the usual container in which he 
presented his silver-framed photos. I expressed my thanks and set the 
case down on the table as I prepared to hand him my memorandum. But 
Hitler was saying: "Lately it's been hard for me to write even a few words 
in my own hand. You know how it shakes. Often I can hardly complete 
my signature. What I've written for you came out almost illegible." 

At that I opened the case to read the inscription. It was in fact scarce- 
ly legible, but couched in unusually cordial terms, joining thanks for my 
work with the assurance of lasting friendship. It was hard for me at this 
point to respond to the gift by presenting him with the memorandum in 
which I dryly set forth the collapse of his whole mission. 

Hitler received it without a word. To bridge the awkwardness of 
this moment, I informed him that I would be driving to the West instead 
of flying to Konigsberg that night. While I was still in the bunker, tele- 
phoning for my car and driver, I was again summoned to Hitler. "I've 
thought it over. It will be better if you take my car and have my driver 
Kemptka drive you." I objected on various grounds. Finally, Hitler agreed 
that I could use my own car, but that Kemptka must drive me. I felt rather 
uneasy, for the warmth Hitler had shown when he handed me his photo- 

* Here we have an example of the chaos created by Hitler's sudden reactions. 
Shortly before this, on the same day, March 18, Keitel had sent a teletype message 
saying: "The Fuehrer has unequivocally [!] decided to carry through the disengage- 
ment and evacuation measures wherever necessary in those western sectors direcdy 
threatened by the enemy." But those who did not obey this order were completely 
"covered": "During the disengagement and evacuation, military operations, food 
transport and coal transport must not be impeded." 

The next day, March 19, 1945, Bormann issued implementation instructions for 
Hider's latest order. These provided that "in case transportation is not available, 
evacuation should be undertaken in horse- or ox-drawn wagons. If necessary the 
male part of the population should proceed on foot." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 440 

graph, a warmth to which I had almost succumbed, was now gone with- 
out a trace. I could feel his ill humor as he dismissed me and was already 
at the door when he said, as if cutting off the possibility of any answer: 
"This time you will receive a written reply to your memorandum!" He 
made a brief pause, then in an icy tone continued: "If the war is lost, the 
people will be lost also. It is not necessary to worry about what the Ger- 
man people will need for elemental survival. On the contrary, it is best for 
us to destroy even these things. For the nation has proved to be the 
weaker, and the future belongs solely to the stronger eastern nation. In 
any case only those who are inferior will remain after this struggle, for 
the good have already been killed." 4 

I was relieved when I at last sat at the wheel of my car in the fresh 
night air, Hitler's chauffeur at my side and Lieutenant Colonel von Poser, 
my liaison officer to the General Staff, on the rear seat. Kemptka had 
agreed that we would take turns driving. By this time it was about half 
past one in the morning, and speed was of the essence if we were to cover 
the three hundred odd miles of autobahn to the headquarters of the Com- 
mander in Chief, West, near Nauheim, before daybreak— for then the 
enemy hedgehopping fighters appeared. We had the radio tuned to the 
broadcaster for the night fighters and kept the grid map on our knees: 
"Night fighters in grid Number — . . . Several Mosquitoes in grid — . . . 
Night fighters in grid — . . ." This way we knew exactly where the 
enemy was. If a formation were approaching us, we would switch to our 
parking lights and feel our way slowly along the edge of the road. As 
soon as our square on the grid map was free of the enemy, we switched 
to high beam and foglights, turned on the big jacklight, and with our 
supercharger howling, roared down the autobahn. By morning we were 
still on the road, but low-lying clouds had brought air activity to a stand- 
still. At headquarters,* I first of all lay down for a few hours sleep. 

Toward noon I had a meeting with Kesselring, but our talk proved 
fruitless. He behaved as a soldier pure and simple and was not inclined to 
discuss Hitler's orders. On the other hand, the party representative on his 
staff proved surprisingly more amenable to reason. As we paced back and 
forth on the terrace of the castle, he assured me that he would do his 
best to suppress reports on the behavior of the population which might 
affect Hitler badly. 

During a simple meal with his staff, Kesselring had just offered a 
brief toast to my fortieth birthday when a formation of enemy fighter 
planes suddenly descended on the castle with a high-pitched whining 
sound. At the same moment the first burst of machine-gun fire struck the 

* This headquarters was located in a small castle atop a cliff, connected with 
bunkers by a stairway. It was the headquarters I had built for Hitler in 1940 which 
he had rejected at the time. 



44i ) Doom 

windows. Everyone threw himself to the floor. Only now did the alarm 
siren sound. The first heavy bombs crashed in the immediate vicinity. 
While the explosions boomed on either side of us, we rushed through 
the smoke and plaster dust into the bunkers. 

This attack was obviously aimed at the western defense headquar- 
ters. The bombs continued to fall without a pause. The bunker swayed 
but was not hit directly. When the attack was over, we continued our 
conferences, at which we were now joined by Hermann Rochling, the 
Saar industrialist, a man in his seventies. In the course of the conversa- 
tion Kesselring told Rochling that the Saar would be lost in the next few 
days. Rochling accepted the news almost indifferently. "We have lost the 
Saar once before and won it back. Old as I am, I shall see it return to our 
possession again." 

The next stage in our journey was Heidelberg, where the Armaments 
Staff for southwest Germany had been transferred. This was a chance for 
me to pay a brief birthday visit to my parents. By day the autobahn could 
not be traversed because of the planes. Since I knew all the secondary 
roads from my boyhood, Rochling and I drove through the Odenwald. 
It was warm, sunny spring weather. For the first time we talked with 
complete frankness. Rochling, formerly an admirer of Hitler, made it quite 
clear that he thought it senseless fanaticism to continue the war. 

It was late evening by the time we reached Heidelberg. The news 
from the Saar sounded good; scarcely any preparations for demolitions 
had been made. Since it was now only a matter of days before the area 
fell into Allied hands, even a command from Hitler could no longer do 
damage. 

Then, during a toilsome drive over roads blocked by retreating troops, 
we were furiously sworn at by tired and battered soldiers. It took until 
midnight for us to reach the army headquarters, situated in a wine-grow- 
ing village of the Palatinate. SS General Hausser was more sensible in 
the interpretation of insane orders than his Commander in Chief. Hausser 
thought that the ordered evacuation could not possibly be carried out 
and that blowing up the bridges would be irresponsible. Five months later, 
a prisoner of war being taken from Versailles, I rode in a truck through 
the Saar and the Palatinate. Both the railroad installations and the high- 
way bridges were largely intact. 

Stohr, the Gauleiter of the Palatinate and the Saar, declared flatly 
that he would not implement the order for evacuation which he had re- 
ceived. A rather curious conversation developed between the Gauleiter 
and the Minister of Armaments and War Production. 

"If you cannot carry out the evacuation and the Fuehrer calls you to 
account, you can say I told you the order had been canceled." 

"No, very kind of you, but I'll take it on my own responsibility." 

I insisted: "But 111 gladly put my head on the block for it." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 442 

Stohr shook his head. "No, I'm doing it. I want to take this on my 
own shoulders." That was the only point on which we could not agree. 

Our next destination was Field Marshal Model's headquarters, a 
hundred and twenty-five miles away in the Westerwald. In the morning 
hours the American low-level planes appeared. We abandoned the main 
roads and by way of secondary roads finally reached a small, peaceful 
village. Nothing indicated that this was the command headquarters of an 
army group. Not an officer or soldier, not a car or motorcycle courier was 
in sight. All automobile traffic was banned by day. 

In the village inn I sat with Model and took up the discussion we 
had begun in Siegburg about preservation of the railroad installations in 
the Ruhr area. While we were talking, an officer came in with a teletype 
message. "This concerns you," Model said, both embarrassed and per- 
plexed. I sensed that it was bad news. 

It was Hitler's "answer in writing" to my memorandum. On every 
point it ordered the exact opposite of the things I had called for on March 
18. "All military, transportation, communications, industrial, and supply 
facilities, as well as all resources within the Reich" were to be destroyed. 
The message was the death sentence for the German people; it called for 
application of the scorched earth principle in its most sweeping form. 
The decree further stripped me of all my powers; all my orders for the 
preservation of industry were explicitly revoked. Now the Gauleiters were 
put in charge of the program of destruction. 5 

The consequences would have been inconceivable: For an indefinite 
period there would have been no electricity, no gas, no pure water, no 
coal, no transportation. All railroad facilities, canals, locks, docks, ships, 
and locomotives destroyed. Even where industry had not been demol- 
ished, it could not have produced anything for lack of electricity, gas, and 
water. No storage facilities, no telephone communications— in short, a 
country thrown back into the Middle Ages. 

It was obvious from Field Marshal Model's attitude that my situation 
had changed. He now talked to me with a distinct air of aloofness and 
avoided all further discussion of our actual subject, the safeguarding of 
the Ruhr industries. 6 Tired and distraught, I lay down to sleep in a farm- 
house. After a few restless hours I walked across the fields and climbed 
a hill. The village lay peacefully below me in the sunlight under a thin 
veil of mist. I could see far out over the hills of Sauerland, the land lying 
between the Sieg and the Ruhr rivers. How was it possible, I thought, 
that one man wanted to transform this land into a desert. I lay down in 
the fern. Everything seemed unreal. But the soil gave off a spicy fra- 
grance; the first green sprouts of plants were springing from the ground. 
As I walked back, the sun was setting. I had taken my resolve. The exe- 
cution of that order must be prevented. I called off the conferences I had 



443 ) Doom 

arranged for that evening in the Ruhr. It was better to explore the situa- 
tion in Berlin first. 

The car was fetched from its hiding place under trees. In spite of 
lively air activity, I set out that night, with dimmed lights, for the East. 
I leafed through my notes while Kemptka sat at the wheel. Many of these 
notes concerned the conferences I had held in the past two days. Inde- 
cisively, I went over the pages. Then I began to tear them up inconspicu- 
ously and to scatter the pieces out the window. During a stop, I happened 
to notice the running board. The strong wind of the car's movement had 
pressed those betraying scraps of paper in a small heap in the corner. 
Covertly, I kicked them into the roadside ditch. 



3° 

Hitler's Ultimatum 



Exhaustion produces a state of indifference, thus i was not at all 
agitated when I met Hitler in the Chancellery on the afternoon of March 
21, 1945. He asked me briefly about the trip, but he was terse and did 
not mention his "reply in writing." It seemed to me pointless to bring it 
up. Without asking me to join them, he listened to Kemptka's report for 
over an hour. 

Ignoring my demotion, I handed Guderian a copy of my memoran- 
dum that same evening. I offered another copy to Keitel who, however, 
refused to take it; he wore an expression of horror, as if it were a danger- 
ous high explosive. I tried in vain to find out the circumstances in which 
Hitler's command had been issued. There was an air of coolness all around 
me, as after the time my name had been discovered on the ministerial list 
of the July 20 conspiracy. Obviously, Hitler's entourage regarded my pres- 
ent state as a fall into ultimate disfavor. I had actually lost all influence 
over the area that concerned me most: the preservation of the industry I 
was supposed to be running. 

At this time two decisions by Hitler proved to me that he was resolved 
on the utmost ruthlessness. In the W shrmacht communique of March 18, 
1945, I read of the execution of foar officers charged with not having 
blown up the Rhine bridge at Remagen in time. Model had just told me 
that they were completely innocent. The "shock of Remagen," as it was 
called, kept many of the responsible men in a state of terror until the 
end of the war. 

( 444 ) 



445 ) Hitler's Ultimatum 

That same day I heard, or rather had it hinted to me, that Hitler had 
ordered the execution of General Fromm. A few weeks before Minister 
of Justice Thierack had remarked to me, offhandedly and completely un- 
moved, between two courses of a meal: "Fromm's going to lose his bon- 
net soon too!" My efforts to speak up for Fromm that evening remained 
fruitless; Thierack was not in the least impressed. Consequently, a few 
days later I sent him a five-page official letter in which I refuted most of 
the charges against Fromm, insofar as I knew what they were, and offered 
to appear before the People's Court as a witness for the defense. 

That was probably an unprecedented request on the part of a Reich 
minister. Only three days later, on March 6, 1945, Thierack wrote me 
curtly that I would have to obtain permission from Hitler in order to 
testify. "The Fuehrer has just informed me" Thierack continued, "that 
he has no intention of issuing an exceptional permission to you in the 
case of Fromm. I therefore will not include your statement in the rec- 
ords of the court/' 1 The executions also made me aware of the nature of 
the risk I was running. 

I was stubborn. When, on March 22, Hitler invited me to one of his 
armaments conferences, I again had Saur represent me. From his notes, 
it was clear that he and Hitler had frivolously ignored the realities. Al- 
though armaments production had long since come to an end, they oc- 
cupied themselves with projects as though the whole of 1945 were still 
at their disposal. For example, they discussed the totally nonexistent 
crude-steel production and also decided that the 8.8 centimeter anti- 
tank gun for the troops was to be produced in "maximum quantities" 
and the production of the 21 centimeter mortars was to be increased. 
They gloried over the development of entirely new weapons: a new spe- 
cial rifle for the parachute troops— with "maximum ejection speed," of 
course— or a new supercaliber 30.5 centimeter mortar. The minutes also 
recorded an order of Hitler's that five new variants of existing types of 
tanks were to be demonstrated to him within a few weeks. In addition, he 
wanted to investigate the effect of Greek fire, known since classical an- 
tiquity, and he wished to have our jet fighter-bomber, the Me-262, re- 
armed as quickly as possible as a fighter plane. In ordering this last action, 
he was tacitly conceding the error he had made a year and a half before, 
when he had persistently refused the advice of all the experts. 2 

I had returned to Berlin on March 21. Early in the morning three 
days later I received the news that British troops had crossed the Rhine 
on a broad front, north of the Ruhr, without meeting any resistance. Our 
troops were helpless, as I had already heard from Model. As late as Sep- 
tember 1944 our strenuous production of armaments had made it possible 
to erect a new defensive front in a short time out of weaponless armies. 
This could no longer be done. Germany was being overrun. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 446 

I drove to the Ruhr area once more. Saving its industry was the cru- 
cial question for the postwar era. In Westphalia a flat tire forced us to 
stop. Unrecognized in the twilight, I stood in a farmyard talking to the 
farmers. To my surprise, the faith in Hitler which had been hammered 
into their minds all these last years was still strong. Hitler could never 
lose the war, they declared. "The Fuehrer is still holding something in 
reserve that he'll play at the last moment. Then the turning point will 
come. It's only a trap, his letting the enemy come so far into our country." 
Even among members of the government I still encountered this naive 
faith in deliberately withheld secret weapons that at the last moment 
would annihilate an enemy recklessly advancing into the country. Funk, 
for example, asked me: "We still have a special weapon, don't we? A 
weapon that will change everything?" 

That very night, I began my conferences with Dr. Rohland, the 
chief of the Ruhr staff, and his most important assistants. Their report 
was terrifying. The three Gauleiters of the Ruhr region were determined 
to carry out Hitler's demolition order. Horner, one of our technical as- 
sistants who was, unfortunately, at the same time chief of the party tech- 
nical office, had drawn up a plan of destruction at the Gauleiters' com- 
mand. Regretfully, but with the air of a man accustomed to obedience, 
he explained the details of his scheme that was to eliminate the industry 
of the Ruhr for the foreseeable future. The plan was a technical master- 
piece: Even the coal mines were to be flooded, and their restoration pre- 
vented for years to come by destruction of the lift machinery. Barges 
loaded with cement were to be sunk to block the transshipment ports and 
the canals of the Ruhr. The Gauleiters wanted to begin their first demoli- 
tions next day, since the enemy troops were advancing , rapidly in the 
northern part of the Ruhr. But the Gauleiters had so little transportation 
at their disposal that they were dependent on aid from my armaments 
organization. They hoped to find an ample supply of explosives, blasting 
caps, and fuses in the mines. 

Rohland immediately summoned some twenty reliable coal-mining 
men to the former Thyssen castle of Landsberg, the seat of the Ruhr staff. 
After a brief conference it was jointly decided, as though this were one of 
the most natural acts in the world, that all dynamite, blasting caps, and 
fuses were to be thrown into the sumps of the mines. One of our men was 
instructed to use what meager fuel was available to drive all the trucks 
under our command out of the Ruhr area. If necessary, trucks and gaso- 
line were to be placed at the disposal of the fighting troops, which would 
make them absolutely unavailable to the civilian sector. Finally, I prom- 
ised Rohland and his associates fifty submachine guns— we were still pro- 
ducing thousands— to be used for guarding power plants and other impor- 
tant industrial installations against the Gauleiters' demolition squads. In 
the hands of determined men defending their own places of work, these 



447 ) Hitlers Ultimatum 

weapons represented considerable force, since the police and party func- 
tionaries had only recently been compelled to deliver their weapons to the 
army. What this amounted to, really, was open revolt. 

Gauleiters Florian, Hoffmann, and Schlessmann were at this time 
meeting at the Hotel Bleibergquelle near Langenberg. Disobeying all of 
Hitler s injunctions, on the next day I made another effort to win them 
over to my view. I had a heated dispute with Gauleiter Florian of Diissel- 
dorf . He took the line that if the war were lost, it was not the fault of Hit- 
ler or the party, but of the German people. Only miserable creatures would 
survive such a catastrophe anyhow. But I was able to make Hoffmann and 
Schlessmann see some reason. In spite of this, they were in a quandary: 
The Fuehrer's orders must be obeyed, they said, and no one could relieve 
them of their responsibility. They were altogether perplexed, all the more 
so since Bormann had meanwhile passed on a new order from Hitler even 
more radically calling for destruction of the basis of the nations life.* 
Hitler once again commanded that "areas which we cannot at present 
hold, and whose occupation by the enemy is probable, must be evacu- 
ated." To forestall any objections, the edict continued: "From the many 
descriptions he has received, the Fuehrer is aware of the great difficulties 
involved in implementing this order. The Fuehrer's demands are based 
on precise and cogent deliberations. The absolute necessity of evacuation 
is not open to question." 

Any such resettlement of millions of people from the territories west 

* The decree read as follows: 

Re: Reception of fellow Germans transferred from evacuated areas. I am dele- 
gated to report as follows: 

On March 19, 1945, the Fuehrer issued an order on demolitions which you 
have already received or which you will find enclosed. At the same time the 
Fuehrer unequivocally ordered that areas which we cannot at present hold, and 
whose occupation by the enemy is probable, must be evacuated. 

The Fuehrer has imposed upon the Gauleiters of districts near the front the 
solemn obligation to do all that is humanly possible to assure total evacuation, 
that is the withdrawal from the threatened areas of every single fellow German 
[Volksgenosse; a word with race-theory overtones]. From the many descriptions 
he has received, the Fuehrer is aware of the great difficulties involved in imple- 
menting this order. 

The Fuehrer's demands are based on precise and cogent deliberations. The 
absolute necessity of evacuation is not open to discussion. 

If the evacuation and transportation of so many fellow Germans is a difficult 
problem, providing them with shelter in the interior districts of Germany will be 
no less difficult. This seemingly impossible task of housing our fellow Germans 
from the evacuated areas must be accomplished. The Fuehrer expects that the 
districts of the interior will display the needful understanding for the inescapable 
demands of the hour. 

We must improvise in every possible way in order to master the present 
situation in each region. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 448 

of the Rhine and the Ruhr, from the dense population centers of Mann- 
heim and Frankfurt, could only be undertaken in rural areas, chiefly in 
Thuringia and the lowlands of the Elbe. The inadequately dressed and 
poorly fed urban population was supposed to flood into a countryside 
without sanitary provisions, shelter, or food. Famine, disease, and misery 
were inevitable. 

The assembled Gauleiters agreed that the party no longer had any 
power to carry out these orders. But to our general astonishment, Florian 
read aloud the text of a ringing summons to the party functionaries of 
Diisseldorf, which he intended to have posted throughout the city. It 
called for: setting fire to all remaining buildings of the city upon the 
approach of the enemy, evacuation of all the inhabitants. Let the enemy 
march into a burned out, deserted city! 3 

The two other Gauleiters had meanwhile become uncertain of them- 
selves. They were ready to accept my interpretation of the Fuehrer s 
order— that the Ruhr's industry was still important for armaments pro- 
duction, all the more so since in the struggle for the Ruhr we could sup- 
ply the troops with ammunition directly from the factories. Therefore 
the destruction of the power plants, which was to have begun next day, 
was postponed, and the order for demolition was transformed into an 
order to temporarily paralyze the factories. 

Immediately after this conference I again called on Field Marshal 
Model in his headquarters. He proved to be willing to keep the fighting 
as far from the industrial area as possible and thus reduce demolitions 
to a minimum. He would also refrain from ordering the destruction of 
any factories. 4 For the rest, he promised to keep in close contact with 
Dr. Rohland and his associates during the next few weeks. 

From Model, I learned that American troops were advancing upon 
Frankfurt. A precise front line could no longer be determined, and 
Kesselring's headquarters had just been shifted farther to the east. About 
three o'clock in the morning I arrived at Kesselring's old headquarters 
near Nauheim. After a talk with his chief of staff, General Westphal, I 
was satisfied that he too would interpret the demolition order in a merci- 
ful sense. Since even the chief of staff had no idea of how far the enemy 
had advanced in the course of the night, we detoured to the east, driving 
through the Spessart and the Odenwald to Heidelberg, and thus passed 
through the small town of Lohr. Our troops had already withdrawn; a 
curiously expectant mood hovered over the silent streets and squares. 
At one intersection stood a solitary soldier with a couple of bazookas. He 
looked at me in surprise. 

"What in the world are you waiting for?" I asked him. 

"For the Americans," he replied. 

"And what will you do when the Americans come?" 

He hesitated only a moment. "Get the hell out of here." 



449 ) Hitlefs Ultimatum 

Here as well as everywhere else I had the impression that people 
thought the war was over. 

At the Armaments Staff office for Baden and Wurttemberg in Heidel- 
berg lay orders from Gauleiter Wagner of Baden commanding the destruc- 
tion of the water and gas works in my native city, as in all other cities in 
Baden. We found a simple method of thwarting these orders. We went 
ahead and prepared the written copies but put the letters into the mailbox 
of a town that was on the point of being occupied by the enemy. 

The Americans had already taken Mannheim, only twelve miles away, 
and were slowly advancing toward Heidelberg. After a nocturnal discus- 
sion with Mayor Neinhaus of Heidelberg, I offered a last service to my 
native city— by writing to SS General Hausser, whom I already knew from 
my work in the Saar, and asking him to declare Heidelberg a hospital city 
to be surrendered without a fight. At dawn I bade my parents good-by. 
During the last hours we spent together they, too, had displayed that un- 
canny calm and composure which had come over the suffering people. 
Both were standing at the front door of our house as I got into the car. 
My father came quickly up to the car once more, and while clasping my 
hand one last time looked silently into my eyes. We had a premonition 
that we would never see each other again. 

Retreating troops without arms or equipment were blocking the road 
to Wurzburg. A wild pig had ventured out of the woods in the half-light 
of morning and was being noisily chased by soldiers. In Wurzburg I called 
on Gauleiter Hellmuth, who invited me to an ample breakfast. While we 
did justice to the excellent country sausages and eggs, the Gauleiter ex- 
plained with the greatest matter-of-factness that to carry out Hitler's de- 
cree he had ordered destruction of the Schweinfurt ball-bearings industry. 
The factory heads and the party authorities were already waiting in an- 
other room for instructions. The plan was well conceived: The oil baths of 
the special machines were to be set afire. Experiences in the air raids had 
already shown that such fires would reduce the machinery to useless scrap 
iron. At first I could not convince him that such destruction was f oolish. 
He asked me when the Fuehrer intended to apply the decisive secret 
weapon. He had heard, from Bormann and Goebbels, that commitment of 
this weapon was impending. 

As I had done so often, I had to tell him that this secret weapon did 
not exist. I knew that this Gauleiter was one of the sensible ones and 
pleaded with him not to carry out Hitlers scorched earth order. Given the 
situation, I argued, it was madness to deprive the people of the founda- 
tions for a continued national life by demolishing industrial facilities and 
bridges. I also mentioned the German troops that were being concentrated 
east of Schweinfurt to counterattack in the center and recapture our arma- 
ments industries. In saying this I was not even lying, for the top leader- 
ship was actually planning a counterattack in the near future. The tired 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 450 

old argument that Hitler could not continue his war without ball bearings 
finally had its effect. Convinced or not, the Gauleiter was not eager to win 
immortal fame for having ruined all chance of victory by destroying the 
Schweinfurt factories. 

After Wurzburg the weather cleared. Only occasionally did we now 
encounter small units marching on foot, without heavy arms, to meet the 
enemy. These were training units which had been raised for the final of- 
fensive. The inhabitants of the villages were busy digging pits in their 
gardens; they were burying their family silver and other valuables. Every- 
where we encountered the same friendly, obliging attitude on the part of 
the rural populace. However, nobody wanted us to take cover between 
houses from low-flying planes, since this might endanger the houses. "Herr 
Minister, would you mind moving on to the next house, down the road a 
piece?" someone called out of a window. 

Precisely because the populace was so peaceable and resigned and 
because well-equipped troop units were nowhere to be seen, the large 
number of bridges prepared for dynamiting struck me as even more insane 
than it had at my Berlin desk. 

In the towns and villages of Thuringia, party formations, chiefly SA 
units, were tramping aimlessly about the streets in their uniforms. Sauckel 
had called up the "great levy," mostly elderly men or children of sixteen. 
This was the Volkssturm that was supposed to confront the enemy, but 
nobody could supply them with weapons. A few days later Sauckel issued 
one more noble injunction to fight to the last, then took off in his car for 
southern Germany. 

Late in the evening of March 27, I arrived in Berlin. I found a 
changed situation there. 

In the meantime Hitler had issued orders that SS Gruppenfuhrer 
Kammler, already responsible for the rocket weapons, was to be in charge 
of the development and production of all modern aircraft. Thus I had lost 
my jurisdiction over air armaments. What was more, since Kammler could 
employ my own assistants in the Ministry, an impossible organizational 
and bureaucratic snarl had been created. In addition, Hitler had explicitly 
commanded that Goering and I accept our subordination to Kammler by 
countersigning the decree. 

I signed without objecting, furious and insulted though I felt at this 
latest humiliation. That day I stayed away from the situation conference. 
Almost at the same time Poser informed me that Hitler had sent Guderian 
on leave. Officially this was a furlough for health reasons, but everyone 
familiar with the inside story knew that Guderian would not return. Thus 
I was losing one of the few men in Hitler's military entourage who had 
not only supported me by action but constantly encouraged me to con- 
tinue my present course. 

On top of everything else my secretary brought me the orders issued 



45i ) Hitler's Ultimatum 

by the chief of the Signal Corps in accordance with Hitlers edict of total 
destruction: the wires and installations of the post office, the railroad sys- 
tem, the waterways, the police, and electric-power transmission lines 
were all to be smashed and severed. By "explosion, fire, or dismantlement," 
all telephone, telegraph and relay offices, the switches of the long-distance 
cables, the masts, antennas, and broadcasting and receiving facilities of 
the radio stations were to be rendered "thoroughly useless." To prevent 
the enemy from making even temporary repairs in the communications 
network of the occupied areas, all stocks of spare parts, all cable and wire, 
even the switching diagrams, cable diagrams, and descriptions of equip- 
ment, were to be fully destroyed. 5 But General Albert Praun intimated to 
me that he would use judgment in carrying out this brutal order. 

On top of all this I received confidential information that armaments 
were to be turned over to Saur, but under the direction of Himmler, who 
was to be appointed Inspector General for War Production. 6 This seemed 
to mean that Hitler intended to drop me. Shortly afterward Schaub tele- 
phoned and in an unusually acid tone let me know I was to see Hitler 
that evening. 

I felt considerable apprehension when I was led into Hitler's office 
deep underground. He was alone, received me frostily, did not shake 
hands, scarcely replied to my greeting, and in a sharp, low voice immedi- 
ately came to the point: "Bormann has given me a report on your con- 
ference with the Ruhr Gauleiters. You pressed them not to carry out my 
orders and declared that the war is lost. Are you aware of what must fol- 
low from that?" 

As if he were reminded of something remote, his voice softened as 
he spoke, the tension lessened, and almost in the tone of a normal person 
he added: "If you were not my architect, I would take the measures that 
are called for in such a case." 

Partly in a spirit of open rebellion, partly from sheer exhaustion, I 
answered impulsively rather than courageously: "Take the measures you 
think necessary and grant no consideration to me as an individual." 

Apparently Hitler had lost the thread; there was a brief pause. He 
continued in a friendly manner, and I had the impression that he had 
already carefully considered and determined this course: "You are over- 
worked and ill. I have therefore decided that you are to go on leave at 
once. Someone else will run your Ministry as your deputy." 

"No, I feel perfectly well," I replied resolutely. "I am not going on 
leave. If you no longer want me as your minister, dismiss me from my 
post." 

Even as I said this I remembered that Goering had already rejected 
this solution a year ago. Hitler now answered decisively, and in a tone of 
finality: "I do not want to dismiss you. But I insist that you begin your 
sick leave immediately." 

I remained stubborn: "I cannot keep the responsibility of a minister 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 452 

while another man is acting in my name." Then, with a shade of concilia- 
tion, and almost as if I were taking an oath, I added: "I cannot, mein 
Fuhrer." That was the first time in the course of the conversation that I 
had used this form of address. 

Hitler appeared unmoved. "You have no choice. It is impossible for 
me to dismiss you." And then, as if likewise wishing to make a gesture 
hinting at his own weakness, he added: "For reasons of foreign and do- 
mestic policy, I cannot spare you." 

Encouraged, I replied: "It's impossible for me to go on leave. As long 
as I am in office I must conduct the affairs of the Ministry. I am not sick!" 

There was a lengthy pause. Hitler sat down, and I did also, unasked. 
In a relaxed tone, Hitler continued: "Speer, if you can convince yourself 
that the war is not lost, you can continue to run your office." 

From my memoranda, and no doubt from Bormanns report, he knew 
quite well how I regarded the situation and what conclusions I had drawn. 
Evidently all he wanted from me was lip service, a verbal statement that 
would bar me from saying otherwise in the future. 

"You know I cannot be convinced of that," I replied sincerely but 
without defiance. "The war is lost." 

Hitler launched into recollections. He spoke of the other difficult sit- 
uations in his life, situations in which all had seemed lost but which he 
had mastered by perseverance, energy, and fanaticism. He went on and 
on, forever, it seemed to me, carried away by his memories of the early 
days of struggle. He drew on such examples as the winter of 1941-42, the 
threatening transportation crisis, even my own stupendous achievements 
in armaments production. I had heard all that from him many times, knew 
these monologues almost by heart, and could have continued them myself 
almost word for word. He scarcely changed the tone of his voice, but per- 
haps the very drone of it made his sermon more compelling. I had had a 
similar feeling years ago in the teahouse, when I had tried to resist his hyp- 
notic eyes. 

Now, since I remained silent and only looked steadily at him, he sur- 
prisingly lowered his demand: "If you would believe that the war can 
still be won, if you could at least have faith in that, all would be well." 
He had passed into an almost pleading tone, and for a moment I thought 
that in his piteousness he was even more persuasive than in his masterful 
poses. Under other circumstances I would probably have weakened and 
given in. This time, what kept me from submitting to his spell was the 
thought of his destructive plans. 

Agitated, and therefore probably speaking a shade too loudly, I said: 
"I cannot, with the best will in the world. And after all, I do not want to 
be one of the swine in your entourage who tell you they believe in victory 
without believing in it." 

Hitler did not react. For a while he stared into space, then again 
began talking about his experiences in the Kampfzeit, the days before the 



453 ) Hitler's Ultimatum 

party had come to power. He reverted once again, as he had often done 
during these weeks, to Frederick the Great's unexpected salvation. "One 
must believe that all will turn out well. ... Do you still hope for a suc- 
cessful continuance of the war, or is your faith shattered?" Once again 
Hitler reduced his demand to a formal profession of faith that would be 
binding upon me: "If you could at least hope that we have not lost! You 
must certainly be able to hope . . . that would be enough to satisfy me." 

I did not answer. 

There was a long, awkward pause. At last Hitler stood up abruptly. 
Now he was very unfriendly again and declared with the sharpness he had 
shown at the beginning of the interview: "You have twenty-four hours 
to think over your answer! Tomorrow let me know whether you hope that 
the war can still be won." Without shaking hands, he dismissed me. 7 

As if to dramatize what lay in store for Germany after Hitler's com- 
mand, immediately after this discussion a teletype message came from the 
Chief of Transportation. Dated March 29, 1945, it read: "Aim is creation 
of a transportation wasteland in abandoned territory. . . . Shortage of 
explosives demands resourceful utilization of all possibilities for produc- 
ing lasting destruction." Included in the list of facilities slated for destruc- 
tion were, once again, all types of bridges, tracks, roundhouses, all tech- 
nical installations in the freight depots, workshop equipment, and sluices 
and locks in our canals. Along with this, simultaneously all locomotives, 
passenger cars, freight cars, cargo vessels, and barges were to be complete- 
ly destroyed and the canals and rivers blocked by sinking ships in them. 
Every type of ammunition was to be employed for this task. If such ex- 
plosives were not available, fires were to be set and important parts 
smashed. Only the technician can grasp the extent of the calamity that 
execution of tins order would have brought upon Germany. The instruc- 
tions were also prime evidence of how a general order of Hitler's was 
translated into terrifyingly thorough terms. 

In my small emergency apartment in the rear wing of the Ministry, 
I went to bed, exhausted, and let my mind cast about for how I was to 
answer Hitlers twenty-four-hour ultimatum. Finally I got up and began 
writing a letter. At first the text moved inconsistently between a desire to 
make Hitler see reason and an attempt to meet him halfway. But then it 
continued bluntly: "When I read the demolition order (of March 19, 1945) 
and, shortly afterward, the stringent evacuation order, I saw these as the 
first steps toward carrying out these intentions." At this point I gave my 
answer to the question he had posed as an ultimatum: "But I can no 
longer believe in the success of our good cause if during these decisive 
months we simultaneously and systematically destroy the foundations of 
our national existence. That is so great an injustice to our people that 
should it be done, Fate can no longer wish us well. ... I therefore beg 
you not to carry out this measure so harmful to the people. If you could 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 454 

revise your policy on this question, I would once more recover the faith 
and the courage to continue working with the greatest energy. It no longer 
lies in our hands," I continued my response to Hitler's ultimatum, "to de- 
cide how Fate will turn. Only a higher Providence can still change our 
future. We can only make our contribution by a strong posture and un- 
shakable faith in the eternal future of our nation." 

I closed not with the Heil, mein Fuhrer, customary in such private 
letters, but used my last words to further my point and invoke the one 
hope that still remained to us: "May God protect Germany."* 

As I reread this letter, I found it a weak performance. Perhaps Hitler 
decided that anything I wrote at this point would express a rebellious 
attitude which would force him to take stern measures against me. For 
when I asked one of his secretaries to type the letter— which since it was 
meant only for him I had written almost illegibly by hand— on Hitler s 
special typewriter with its oversized letters, she telephoned back: "The 
Fuehrer has forbidden me to receive any letters from you. He wants to 

* Further excerpts from this letter: 

My feeling is that if I should quit my post at this critical moment, even at 
your orders, I would be guilty of deserting the German people, not to speak of my 
loyal associates. Nevertheless I am duty-bound to tell you bluntly and without 
embellishment how the course of events looks to me, irrespective of the possible 
consequences for me. Unlike so many of your co-workers I have always spoken 
frankly to you, and I shall continue to do so. . . . 

I believe in the future of the German people. I believe in a Providence that 
is just and inexorable, and thus I believe in God. It pained me deeply during the 
victorious days of 1940 to see how many among our leaders were losing their 
inner integrity. This was the moment when we should have commended ourselves 
to Providence by our decency and inner modesty. Then Fate would have been 
on our side. But during those months we were weighed in the balance and found 
too light for ultimate victory. We wasted a year of precious time luxuriating in 
our easily won success when we could have been girding ourselves for battle. 
This is why we were caught unprepared in the decisive years of 1944 and 1945. 
If all our new weapons had been ready a year earlier, we would be in a very 
different position now. As if we were being warned by Providence, from 1940 
on all our military undertakings were dogged by unprecedented ill luck. Never 
before has an outside element such as the weather played such a decisive and 
devastating role as in this, the most technological of all wars: The cold in 
Moscow, the fog around Stalingrad, and the blue sky above the winter offensive 
in the West in 1944. 

I can continue to carry out my duties with a sense of honor, with conviction, 
and with faith in the future, only if you, mein Fuhrer, continue to uphold our 
life as a people. I shall not enter into a discussion of the way your orders of 
March 19, 1945, will inevitably crush our last remaining industrial potential and 
produce panic and horror among the population. These matters are of the highest 
importance, but they do not involve the principle that concerns me here. . . . 
You will understand my inner conflict. I cannot throw myself into my work or 
generate the necessary confidence if even while I am urging my workers to su- 
preme efforts I know that we are planning to destroy the very foundations of 
their lives. 



455 ) Hitlers Ultimatum 

see you here and have your answer verbally." Shortly afterward I was 
told to come to Hitler at once. 

Toward midnight I drove down Wilhelmstrasse, now shattered by 
bombs, the few hundred yards to the Chancellery, still without knowing 
what I was going to do, or answer. The twenty-four hours were up; I 
had not arrived at an answer. I left it to the moment of confrontation to 
decide what I would say. 

Hitler stood before me, not at all sure of himself, seeming rather anx- 
ious. He asked tersely: "Well?" 

For a moment I was confused. I had no answer ready. But then, sim- 
ply to say something, without reflection and without completely commit- 
ting myself, my lips spoke the words: "Mein Fiihrer, I stand unreservedly 
behind you." 

Hitler did not answer, but he was moved. After brief hesitation he 
shook hands with me, as he had not done when he received me. His eyes 
filled with tears, as they so often did nowadays. "Then all is well," he said. 
He showed plainly how relieved he was. I too was shaken for a moment 
by his unforeseen rush of f eeling. Once again something of the old rela- 
tionship could be felt between us. 

I quickly saw a way to profit by the situation: "If I stand unreservedly 
behind you, then you must again entrust me instead of the Gauleiters with 
the implementation of your decree." 

He authorized me to draw up a document which he would sign at 
once; but when we talked about it, he yielded not an iota on the destruc- 
tion of industrial installations and bridges. And on this note I took my 
leave. By now it was one o'clock at night. 

In one of the rooms of the Chancellery I drafted my instructions "to 
assure uniform implementation of [the] decree of March 19, 1945." I n 
order to avoid any further discussion, I did not even try to undo its pro- 
visions. I merely made sure of two things: "Implementation will be under- 
taken solely by the agencies and organs of the Ministry of Armaments 
and War Production. . . . The Minister of Armaments and War Production 
may, with my authorization, issue instructions for implementation. He may 
pass detailed regulations on procedures to the Reich Defense Commis- 
sioners."* 

Thus I was reappointed. And I smuggled in one sentence which gave 

* The decree read as follows: 

The Fuehrer Fuehrers Headquarters 

March 30, 194s 

To assure uniform implementation of my decree of March 19, 1945, I hereby 
order as follows: 

1. The orders given for destroying industrial installations are aimed exclusively 
at preventing the enemy from using these installations and facilities to increase 
his fighting strength. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 456 

me significant leeway: "The same effect can be achieved with industrial 
installations by crippling them." But to placate Hitler, I added another 
provision that total destruction of particularly important plants would be 
ordered by me. I never gave any such orders. 

Hitler signed this decree in pencil, almost without discussion, after 
he had made a few corrections in a trembling hand. He showed that he 
was still on top of the situation by one revision he made in the first sen- 
tence of the document. I had framed it as generally as possible, explaining 
that the purpose of the destructive measures was to prevent "the en- 
emy from using these installations and facilities to increase his fighting 
strength." Seated wearily behind the map table in the situation room, 
Hitler limited it just to the industrial installations. 

I think Hitler realized that he was making some important conces- 
sions. We talked a bit after he affixed his signature, and I found him 
willing to grant "that the scorched earth idea had no point in a country 
of such small area as Germany. It can only fulfill its purpose in vast spaces 
such as Russia." I made a note of this point and filed it away. 

As usual, Hitlers actions were double-edged. That same evening he 
had ordered the commanders in chief "to intensify to the most fanatical 
level the struggle against the enemy who is now in movement. The na- 



2. No measures may be taken which would impair our own fighting strength. 
Production must be continued up to the last possible moment, even at the risk 
that a factory may fall into the enemy's hands before it can be destroyed. Indus- 
trial installations of all sorts, including food-producing plants, may not be de- 
stroyed until they are immediately threatened by the enemy. 

3. Although bridges and other transportation installations must be destroyed 
to deny the enemy their use for a prolonged period, the same effect can be 
achieved with industrial installations by crippling them lastingly. 

Total destruction of particularly important plants will be ordered on my in- 
structions by the Minister of Armaments and War Production (e.g., munitions 
plants, essential chemical plants, etc.). 

4. The signal for crippling or destroying industrial complexes and other plants 
will be given by the Gauleiter and defense commissioner, who will supervise the 
process. 

Implementation will be undertaken solely by the agencies and organs of the 
Ministry of Armaments and War Production. All the agencies of the party, the 
state and the armed forces are to assist when needed. The Minister of Armaments 
and War Production may, with my authorization, issue instructions for imple- 
mentation. He may pass detailed regulations on procedures to the Reich Defense 
Commissioners. 

6. These guidelines apply to plants and installations in the immediate war 
zone. 

(Signed) Adolf Hitler 

The decree pertained only to industry; the orders for destruction of shipping, 
railroad installations, communications, and bridges remained in effect. 



457 ) Hitler's Ultimatum 

ture of this struggle permits no consideration for the population to be 
taken." 8 

Within the hour I gathered together all available motorcycles, auto- 
mobiles, and orderlies and descended on the printing plant and the tele- 
type offices, determined to halt, by virtue of my restored authority, the 
destruction that was already in progress. By four o'clock in the morning 
I was having my implementation orders distributed— without, as was pro- 
vided, bothering with Hitlers authorization. I boldly renewed all my 
previous instructions on the safeguarding of industrial installations, power 
plants, gasworks, and waterworks as well as food plants— the same instruc- 
tions that Hitler had declared invalid on March 19. I promised that de- 
tailed instructions for the total destruction of industry would be forth- 
coming—and never issued them. 

Again without authorization from Hitler, I ordered ten to twelve food 
trains to proceed to the immediate vicinity of the encircled Ruhr area. 
Together with General Winter of the Wehrmacht Operations Staff, I 
drew up an edict which was intended to stop the destruction of bridges; 
but Keitel frustrated this. I made an agreement with SS Obergruppen- 
fiihrer (Lieutenant General) Frank, who was responsible for the Wehr- 
macht's stockpiles of clothing and food, to distribute the supplies among 
the civilian population. Malzacher, my representative in Czechoslovakia 
and Poland, was to prevent the destruction of bridges in Upper Silesia. 9 

The next day at Oldenburg I met with Seyss-Inquart, the Commis- 
sioner General for the Netherlands. During a pause in the drive I prac- 
ticed using a pistol, the first time in my life I had ever handled one. After 
carefully sounding him out, Seyss-Inquart, to my surprise, admitted that 
he had opened communications with the enemy. He did not want to in- 
flict any more damage on Holland and especially wished to prevent large- 
scale flooding, which Hitler was planning. I came to a similar agreement 
with Gauleiter Kaufmann of Hamburg, whom I visited on the way back 
from Oldenburg. 

On April 3, immediately after my return, I sent out orders forbidding 
the blowing up of sluices, locks, dams, and canal bridges. 10 More and 
more teletype messages, of increasing urgency, came pouring in request- 
ing special orders for dealing with industrial plants. I answered each of 
these by ordering that the works be temporarily crippled.* 

* For instance, a radio message from Gauleiter Uiberreither read as follows: 

Radio message-PZR No. 5/6 0830 4/3/45 
To Reich Minister Albert Speer 
Berlin W 8 

Concerning Fuehrer's orders of March 19, I request detailed instructions as to 
which armaments plants in my Gau are not to be destroyed under any circum- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 458 

Fortunately, in making such decisions I was able to count on support. 
Dr. Hupf auer, my political deputy, had formed an alliance with the state 
secretaries of the principal ministries in order to limit the effect of Hitler's 
policy. One member of his circle was Bormanns deputy, Gerhard Klopf er. 
We had pulled the rug out from under Bormann; his orders were issued 
into a vacuum, so to speak. During this last phase of the Third Reich he 
may have dominated Hitler; but outside the headquarters bunker other 
laws prevailed. Even Ohlendorf, the chief of the SD (Sicherheitsdienst, 
the dreaded Security Service), told me in prison that he had been regu- 
larly informed of my actions but had allowed the reports to stop at his 
desk. 

Actually, in April 1945, I had the feeling that in collaboration with 
the state secretaries I was able to do more in my area than Hitler, Goeb- 
bels, and Bormann put together. On the military side I had good relations 
with General Krebs, the new chief of staff, since he had formerly been 
a member of Model's staff. But even Jodl, Buhle, and Praun, the chief of 
the Signal Corps, showed an increasing understanding of the real situation. 

I was aware that if Hitler knew what I was doing, he would have 
seen it as high treason. I had to assume that this time I would have to 
pay the full penalty. During these months of playing a double game I 
followed a simple principle: I stayed as close to Hitler as possible. Every 



stances. Since the military situation is completely fluid, a surprise enemy break- 
through can be expected at any moment. I call your attention to the aircraft 
factories in Marburg, Steyr, Daimler-Puch-Graz, and relocated factories. The fate 
of the armaments plants in upper Styria should be determined on the basis of 
the military situation in the Lower Danube region, but I have no information 
about that. Should the hydroelectric or steam power plants on the Drau and the 
Mur be destroyed before they can fall into the hands of the enemy undamaged? 
Your guidelines are only partly applicable here, since there is no definite front 
line. 

(Signed) Gauleiter Uiberreither 

My answer read: 

Berlin, April 3, 1945 
To Gauleiter Uiberreither, Graz 

According to the Fuehrer's orders of March 30, 1945 there is to be no 
scorched earth. All installations and plants should be crippled so that the enemy 
will derive no additional military potential from them. In almost every case expert 
crippling by engineers will be sufficient and will fulfill the conditions stipulated by 
the Fuehrer. This applies to the plants mentioned in your cable. The Fuehrer's 
order of March 30, 1945, was intended to eliminate the varied interpretations 
that could be attached to the order of March 19, 1945, and to establish his un- 
equivocal commitment to the method of crippling. Destruction is therefore per- 
missible only if crippling would not achieve the desired effect. In addition the 
Fuehrer proclaims: Work until the last possible moment. Power plants are to be 
crippled only. 

(Signed) Speer 



459 ) Hitlers Ultimatum 

absence furnished cause for suspicion, but an existing suspicion could be 
observed or eliminated only by someone who was constantly in his pres- 
ence. I was not suicidally inclined; I had already set up an emergency 
hiding place in a primitive hunting lodge sixty miles from Berlin. In ad- 
dition Rohland was keeping another hiding place ready for me in one 
of the numerous hunting lodges belonging to Prince Ftirstenberg. 

Even in the situation conferences at the beginning of April, Hitler 
was still talking about counteroperations, about attacks upon the West- 
ern enemy's exposed flanks— the Allied troops were now beyond Kassel 
and moving forward at a swift pace toward Eisenach. Hitler continued 
to send his divisions from one place to the other— a cruel, phantom war 
game. For when I would come back from a visit to the front and check 
the previous day's movements of our troops on the map, I could only 
note that I had seen nothing of them in the region I had driven through— 
and what troops I had passed consisted of soldiers without heavy weapons, 
armed solely with rifles. 

I, too, was now daily holding a minor situation conference at which 
my liaison officer to the General Staff gave me the latest information- 
contrary to an order of Hitler's incidentally, for he had forbidden the 
military to brief nonmilitary government authorities on the military situa- 
tion. Poser was able to tell me with fair exactness from day to day which 
area would be occupied by the enemy in the next twenty-four hours. 
These sober reports had nothing in common with the deliberately misty 
situation reporting that went on in the bunker underneath the Chancel- 
lery. There, nothing was said about evacuations and retreats. It seemed 
to me that the General Staff under General Krebs had finally abandoned 
giving Hitler accurate information and had settled for keeping him busy 
with war games. When, contrary to the situation report of the evening, 
cities and whole areas proved next day to have already fallen, Hitler re- 
mained perfectly calm. Now he no longer flew at the members of his 
entourage, as he had done only a few weeks before. He seemed resigned. 

At the beginning of April, Hitler had summoned Field Marshal Kes- 
selring, the western Commander in Chief, to him. By chance I happened 
to be present at this ridiculous conversation. Kesselring tried to explain 
the hopelessness of the situation to Hitler. But he had spoken no more 
than a few sentences when Hitler seized the floor and began lecturing the 
Field Marshal on how he intended to annihilate the American wedge ad- 
vancing toward Eisenach by attacking it on the flank with a few hundred 
tanks. He would create a colossal panic and thus drive the Western enemy 
back out of Germany again. Hitler went off into long explications of the 
notorious inability of American soldiers to accept defeats, although the 
Battle of the Bulge had just proved the opposite. At the time I was angry 
with Kesselring for agreeing, after only briefly demurring, to these fan- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 460 

tasies and entering into a discussion of Hitler's plans with seeming serious- 
ness. But I realized later that there was no point getting excited about 
battles that would never be fought. 

At one of the subsequent conferences Hitler again explained his 
idea of a flank attack. As dryly as possible I interjected: "If everything 
is destroyed, the recovery of these areas will do me no good at all." Hitler 
said nothing. I ventured a step further: "I cannot rebuild the bridges 
so quickly." 

Hitler, obviously in a euphoric mood, replied: "Don't worry, Herr 
Speer, not as many bridges have been destroyed as I have ordered." 

Just as good-humoredly, almost jokingly, I replied that I felt rather 
odd at being pleased with the disobedience of an order. To my surprise, 
Hitler was prepared to look at a new decree I had prepared. 

When I showed Keitel the draft, he lost his temper for a moment. 
"Why still another change! We already have the demolition order. ... No 
war can be waged without blowing up bridges!" Finally he agreed to my 
draft, though making minor emendations in the text, and Hitler signed 
the new instructions. It was now official policy to do no more than cripple 
transportation and communications facilities and to postpone destroying 
bridges until the last moment. Once again, three weeks before the end, 
I extracted Hitler's consent to this final statement: "With regard to all 
measures for demolition and evacuation, it must be borne in mind . . . 
that when lost territory is recovered these installations should be usable 
for German production." 11 Hitler did, however, strike out a clause that 
destruction should be postponed "even if the enemy's rapid movement 
creates the risk that a bridge . . . may fall into his hands before it can be 
destroyed." 

That same day General Praun, the chief of the Signal Corps, revoked 
his order of March 27, 1945, canceled all demolition instructions, and 
even quietly ordered the safeguarding of the stockpiles, since they might 
be handy after the war for restoring the communications network. Hitler's 
reason for destroying communications was in any case senseless, he com- 
mented, since the enemy carried his own cable and radio stations with 
him. I do not know whether the Transportation Chief canceled his decree 
on laying waste to all transportation facilities. Keitel, in any case, refused 
to issue new instructions on the basis of Hitler's latest decree since this 
might be subject to further interpretation. 12 

Keitel quite rightly took me to task for having created unclear com- 
mand relationships by eliciting from Hitler his order of April 7. In the 
nineteen days between March 18 and April 7, 1945, no less than twelve 
contradictory decrees had been issued on this question. But the chaotic 
command situation made it possible for men of good will to limit chaos 
in the future. 



3 1 

The Thirteenth Hour 



IN SEPTEMBER, WERNER NAUMANN, STATE SECRETARY IN THE PROPAGANDA 

Ministry, had invited me to stiffen the will to fight by speaking on the 
German radio network. Suspecting a trap by Goebbels, I begged off. But 
now that Hitler had seemingly swung over to my line, I saw a radio ad- 
dress as an opportunity to call upon the public in general to avoid sense- 
less demolitions. As soon as Hitler's April 7 decree was published, I let 
Naumann know that I would be willing to make a speech and then drove 
off to Milch's hunting cottage by secluded Stechlin Lake. 

In this last phase of the war we were trying to prepare for whatever 
might come. In order to be able to defend myself if necessary, I spent 
some time on the lake shore practicing shooting at a dummy. In between 
I worked on my radio speech. By evening I was satisfied; I was able to 
hit the dummy several times in rapid succession, and my speech seemed 
to convey my message without exactly exposing me. Over a glass of wine 
I read it aloud to Milch and one of his friends. 

"It is a mistake to believe in the appearance of miraculous secret 
weapons which will take the place of the full commitment of the individ- 
ual soldier!" I said, among other things. We had not destroyed the in- 
dustries of the occupied territories, I continued, and now I regarded it 
as our duty to guard the foundations of civilized life in our own country 
also. "All those overzealous people who refuse to understand this need 
must be punished with the utmost severity. For," I went on, using the 

(460 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 462 

characteristically bombastic language of the time, "they are sinning 
against the most sacred possession of the German people: the source of 
our nations vitality/' 

I paid lip service to the theory of recovering the lost territory, then 
dwelt a bit on the phrase "transportation wasteland," which our chief of 
transportation had used: "The people must do everything in their power 
to make sure such plans are thwarted. If we act prudently and with com- 
mon sense in this emergency, supplies can be made to last until the next 
harvest." 

I finished my reading. Equably and stoically, Milch commented: "The 
meaning comes out clearly, but the Gestapo will see it too." 

On April 11 the radio recording truck was already at the door of the 
Ministry and workmen were laying cable in my office when a telephone 
call reached me: "Come to the Fuehrer and bring the text of the speech 
with you." 

I had prepared a special version for the press which blurred the 
strongest statements, 1 although I fully intended to read the original text 
aloud. I took the less dangerous version with me. Hitler was sitting in 
his bunker office having tea with one of his secretaries. A third cup was 
brought for me. It was a long time since I had sat opposite him and seen 
him in so intimate and relaxed a mood. He ceremonially adjusted his thin 
metal-framed glasses, which gave him the look of a schoolteacher, took 
a pencil, and after the first few pages began cutting whole paragraphs. 
Refraining from any discussion, he occasionally remarked in a quite friend- 
ly tone: "Let's leave that out," or, "But this passage is superfluous." His 
secretary freely picked up the pages Hitler laid aside. She read them 
through and remarked regretfully: "A pity, such a nice speech." Hitler 
dismissed me amiably, with what sounded like a piece of very friendly 
advice: "Do make a new draft."* 

In the cut version the speech had lost all point. And unless I had 
Hitler's approval I could not use the broadcasting facilities of the Reich 
network. Since Naumann, too, did not mention the matter again, I let it be 
forgotten. 

In December 1944 the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra gave its last 
concert of the year. Wilhelm Furtwangler had invited me to come to the 
conductor's room. With disarming unworldliness he asked me straight out 
whether we had any prospect of winning the war. When I replied that the 
end was imminent, Furtwangler nodded; he had come to the same con- 
clusion. I felt he was in danger, since Bormann, Goebbels, and Himmler 
had not forgotten many of his frank remarks as well as his defense of the 
blacklisted composer Hindemith, and I advised him not to return from an 

* Saur told me during our imprisonment in Nuremberg that Hitler had said at 
the time: "Speer is still the best of them all." 



463 ) The Thirteenth Hour 

impending concert tour in Switzerland. "But what is going to become of 
my orchestra?" he exclaimed. "I'm responsible for it." I promised to look 
after the musicians during the coming months. 

Early in April 1945, Gerhart von Westermann, the general manager 
of the Philharmonic, informed me that on Goebbels's orders the members 
of the orchestra were to be conscripted in the last call-up for the defense 
of Berlin. I telephoned Goebbels and gave all the reasons why the musi- 
cians should not be drafted into the People's Militia. The Propaganda Min- 
ister reproved me sharply: "I alone raised this orchestra to its special level. 
My initiative and my money made it what it has become, what it repre- 
sents to the world today. Those who come after have no right to it. It can 
go under along with us." 

Remembering the system Hitler had used at the beginning of the 
war to save favored artists from being drafted, I had Colonel von Poser 
go to the draft boards and destroy the papers of the Philharmonic musi- 
cians. In order to give the orchestra financial support as well, my Ministry 
arranged a few concerts. 

"When Bruckner's Romantic Symphony is played, it will mean the 
end is upon us," I told my friends. That final concert took place on the 
afternoon of April 12, 1945. The Philharmonic Hall was unheated and 
everyone who wanted to hear this last concert in the imperiled city sat 
huddled in overcoats. Electricity was usually cut off at the hour of the 
concert, but for this one day I ordered the current to be kept on so that 
the hall could be lighted. The Berliners must have wondered. For the 
beginning I had ordered Briinnhilde's last aria and the finale from Gotter- 
ddmmerung—Si rather bathetic and also melancholy gesture pointing to 
the end of the Reich. After Beethoven's violin concerto came the Bruckner 
symphony, dear to me especially for its architectonic final movement. 
That was the last music I would hear for a long time to come. 

When I returned to the Ministry, I found a message from the office 
of the Fuehrer's adjutant to telephone at once. "Where in the world have 
you been? The Fuehrer has been waiting for you." 

When I arrived in the bunker, Hitler caught sight of me and rushed 
toward me with a degree of animation rare in him these days. He held 
a newspaper clipping in his hand. "Here, read it! Here! You never wanted 
to believe it. Here it is!" His words came in a great rush. "Here we have 
the miracle I always predicted. Who was right? The war isn't lost. Read 
it! Roosevelt is dead!" 

He could not calm down. He thought this was proof of the infallible 
Providence watching over him. Goebbels and many others were bubbling 
over with delight as they exclaimed how right he had been in his reit- 
erated conviction that the tide would turn. Now history was repeating 
itself, just as history had given a hopelessly beaten Frederick the Great 
victory at the last moment. The miracle of the House of Brandenburg! 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 464 

Once again the Tsarina had died, the historic turning point had come, 
Goebbels repeated again and again and again. For a moment this scene 
stripped the veil from the deceitful optimism of the past several months. 
Later on, Hitler sat exhausted, looking both liberated and dazed as he 
slumped in his armchair. But I sensed that he was still without hope. 

Innumerable fantasies burgeoned in the wake of the news of Roose- 
velt's death. A few days later Goebbels suggested to me that since I had 
so much credit in the bourgeois West, what would I think of using one of 
our long-range planes to fly to meet Truman, the new American Presi- 
dent? But such ideas vanished as rapidly as they cropped up. 

On yet another of these early days of April, I happened into Bis- 
marck's former sitting room and found Dr. Ley surrounded by a sizable 
group, among them Schaub and Bormann, several adjutants and orderlies. 
Ley came rushing toward me with the news: "Death rays have been in- 
vented! A simple apparatus that we can produce in large quantities. I've 
studied the documentation; there's no doubt about it. This will be the de- 
cisive weapon!" With Bormann nodding confirmation, Ley went on, stut- 
tering as always, to find fault with me: "But of course your Ministry 
rejected the inventor. Fortunately for us he wrote to me. But now you 
personally must get this project going. Immediately. At this moment 
there's nothing more important." 

Ley went on to rail at the inadequacy of my organization, which 
he said was calcified and overbureaucratized. The whole thing was so 
absurd that I did not bother to contradict him. "You're absolutely right," 
I said. "Why don't you take it over personally? I'll be glad to give you 
all the powers you'll need as 'Commissioner for Death Rays.' " 

Ley was delighted with this proposal. "Of course. I'll take charge of 
it. In this matter I'll even be glad to act as your subordinate. After all, 
I started as a chemist." 

I suggested an experiment, recommending that he use his own rab- 
bits; all too often results were faked by using doctored animals, I said. 
A few days later I actually received a telephone call from Ley's adjutant. 
He gave me a list of electrical equipment needed for the experiment. 

We decided to carry on with this farce. My friend Liischen, the head 
of our entire electrical industry, was told the story and asked to hunt up 
the devices the inventor wanted. He soon returned and informed me: 
"I was able to supply everything except one circuit breaker. We don't 
have any with the particular circuit-breaking speed requested. But the 
'inventor insists on this particular item. You know," Liischen continued, 
laughing, "you won't guess what I've found out. This particular circuit 
breaker has not been made for about forty years. It's mentioned in an old 
edition of the Graetz [a physics textbook for secondary schools] from 
around 1900." 



465 ) The Thirteenth Hour 

Such wild notions flourished as the enemy approached. In all ser- 
iousness Ley also advanced the following theory: "When the Russians 
overrun us from the east, the torrent of German refugees will be so heavy 
that it will press upon the West like a migration of the nations, break 
through, flood the West and then take possession." Even Hitler mocked 
such crackpot theories on the part of his labor leader, but during that last 
period he liked to have Ley close at hand. 

In the first half of the month of April, Eva Braun unexpectedly 
and unbidden arrived in Berlin and declared that she would not leave 
Hitler's side again. Hitler urged her to return to Munich, and I too of- 
fered her a seat in our courier plane. But she obstinately refused, and 
everyone in the bunker knew why she had come. Figuratively and in 
reality, with her presence a messenger of death moved into the bunker. 

Hitler s physician, Dr. Brandt, a permanent member of the Ober- 
salzberg circle since 1934, had left his wife and child in Thuringia to be 
"rolled over"— as the phrase of the day had it— by the Americans. Hitler 
appointed a summary court-martial, the judges to consist of Goebbels, 
the youth leader Axmann, and SS General Berger. But Hitler dominated 
the case, acting both as prosecutor and supreme authority wrapped in- 
to one, as it were; he demanded the death penalty and formulated the 
charges against Brandt: that Brandt had known he could have brought 
his family safely to Obersalzberg. In addition there was suspicion that 
he had sent secret documents to the Americans, using his wife as courier. 
Hitler s chief secretary of many years burst into tears. "I no longer under- 
stand him," she said of Hitler. Himmler came to the bunker and reas- 
sured the troubled entourage. Before the court-martial could take place 
an important witness had to be interrogated, he told us, and added slyly: 
"This witness is not going to be found." 

This incident had placed me in an embarrassing situation also, for 
on April 6 I had moved my family to an estate in the vicinity of Kappeln 
in Holstein, far from big cities on the Baltic* Now that had suddenly 
become a crime. When Hitler had Eva Braun ask me where my family 
was, I lied, saying that they were on a friend's estate in the vicinity of 
Berlin. This satisfied Hitler, but he wanted me to promise that we too 
would go to Obersalzberg when he retreated there. At that time he still 
intended to lead the final struggle in the so-called Alpine Redoubt. 

Even if Hitler left Berlin, Goebbels declared, he wanted to meet his 
end in Berlin. "My wife and my children are not to survive me. The Amer- 
icans would only coach them to make propaganda against me." But when 

* The plan for the division of Germany was known by now. Holstein had been 
assigned to the British. I was certain that the British would behave fairly to the fam- 
ilies of prominent Nazis. Also, the estate was situated in the command sector assigned 
to Doenitz, whom I planned to join when the end was upon us. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 466 

I visited Frau Goebbels in Schwanenwerder in the middle of April, I 
learned that she could not face the thought that her children were to die. 
Nevertheless she apparently gave in to her husband's decision. A few days 
later I proposed to her that at the last moment a barge of our transport 
fleet be tied up at night at the landing stage of the Goebbels property in 
Schwanenwerder. She and the children could hide below deck until the 
barge had been moved to a tributary on the western side of the Elbe. 
We would supply food enough so that she could remain there for some 
time undiscovered. 

After Hitler had stated that he would not survive a defeat, many of 
his closest associates vied with each other in protesting that there would 
be nothing left for them but suicide too. But I felt that they had a moral 
duty to face trial by the enemy. Two of the most successful air force of- 
ficers, Baumbach and Galland, worked with me during the last days of the 
war developing a weird plan for laying hands on the most important mem- 
bers of Hitler s entourage and preventing them from committing suicide. 
Every evening, we had discovered, Bormann, Ley, and Himmler drove 
out of Berlin to various suburban villages that were spared air raids. Our 
plan was simple: When the enemy night bombers dropped white para- 
chute flares, every car stopped and the passengers fled into the fields. 
Flares fired by signal pistols would undoubtedly produce similar reactions. 
Then a troop of soldiers armed with submachine guns would overpower 
the six-man escort squads. 

Flares were actually brought to my home, the selection of soldiers 
discussed, details considered. In the general confusion it would have been 
possible to bring the arrested men to a secure place. To my surprise Dr. 
Hupfauer, Ley's former chief assistant, insisted that the coup against Bor- 
mann be carried out by party members seasoned by experience at the 
front. No one in the party was so hated as Bormann, Hupfauer said; 
Gauleiter Kaufmann was claiming the privilege of personally killing "the 
Fuehrer's Mephistopheles." 

But after hearing about these fantastic schemes of ours, General 
Thomale, chief of staff of the Armored Forces, convinced me in a noc- 
turnal conversation on the open road that it was not for us to intervene 
in the judgment of God. 

Meanwhile, Bormann was pursuing his own schemes. After Brandt 
was arrested, I was warned by State Secretary Klopfer that the arrest 
had been engineered by Bormann and that it was also meant as a blow 
against me. Bormann evidently thought— quite wrongly, by the way— that 
Brandt was the chief mainstay of my influence with Hitler. Klopfer sug- 
gested that I be very careful about making any careless remarks. 2 

The enemy radio also broadcast several news items that worried me. 
One story was that I had helped a nephew of mine, who had been sen- 
tenced by a court-martial for reading some of Lenin's writings, to regain 



467 ) The Thirteenth Hour 

his freedom. 3 Another report said that my associate Karl Hettlage, who 
had always been in bad grace with the party, was on the verge of arrest. 
And a Swiss newspaper was supposed to have claimed that von Brau- 
chitsch, the former Commander in Chief of the army, and I were the only 
people with whom the Allies could deal on the terms of a surrender. Per- 
haps the enemy was deliberately spreading such reports to produce dis- 
sension in the leadership; perhaps they were rumors. 

During these days of disintegration the army quietly assigned me 
several reliable frontline officers armed with submachine guns who took 
up quarters in my home. For emergencies they had an eight-wheeled 
armored reconnaissance vehicle ready, with which we could presumably 
have escaped from Berlin. To this day I have never learned on whose 
orders or on the basis of what information this was done. 

The assault on Berlin was imminent. Hitler had already appointed 
General Reymann to be commandant of the city for the battle. At first 
Reymann remained subordinate to General Heinrici, the Commander in 
Chief of the army group which extended from the Baltic Sea along the 
Oder River to about sixty miles south of Frankfurt an der Oder. Heinrici 
was a man I trusted, for I had known him a long time and only recently 
he had helped me to surrender the industry of the Rybnicker coal basin 
intact. So when Reymann insisted on preparing every bridge in Berlin 
for demolition, I drove to Heinrici's headquarters near Prenzlau. That was 
on April 15, one day before the beginning of the great Russian offensive 
against Berlin. For technical reinforcement I brought with me the Berlin 
municipal superintendent of roads, Langer, and the Berlin chief of the 
Reichsbahn, Beck. At my request Heinrici ordered Reymann to attend 
the conference. 

The two technicians demonstrated that the planned demolitions 
would mean the death of Berlin. 4 The commandant of the city referred to 
Hitler's orders to defend Berlin by every possible expedient. "I must fight, 
and therefore I must be able to destroy bridges." 

"But only in the direction of the main blow?" Heinrici interjected. 

"No, wherever there is fighting," General Reymann said. 

I asked whether all the bridges in the center of the city were also to 
be destroyed if the fighting came down to street battles. Reymann said 
yes. This was the moment for some platonic reasoning. I had it down to 
a pattern by now. "Are you going to fight because you believe in victory?" 
I asked. 

The general was taken aback for a moment; then he had no choice 
but to answer this question affirmatively. 

"If Berlin is thoroughly destroyed," I said, "then industry will be 
wiped out for the foreseeable future. And without industry the war is 
lost." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 

General Reymann was in a quandary. He did not know what to do 
Fortunately, General Heinrici came to the rescue with specific orders. 
The explosives were to be removed from the blasting charges on the vital 
arteries of the Berlin railroad and highway network. Bridges would be 
blown up only in the actual course of important military actions.* 

After our associates had left, Heinrici turned to me again and said 
privately: "These instructions will assure that no bridges will be destroyed 
in Berlin. For there will not be any battle for Berlin. If the Russians break 
through to Berlin, one of our wings will pull out to the north and the other 
to the south. In the north, we'll base our defense line on the east-west 
canal systems. But I'm afraid that the bridges there will have to go." 

I understood. "Then Berlin will be taken quickly?" 

The general agreed. "At least without much resistance." 

The next morning, April 16, I was awakened very early. Lieutenant 
Colonel von Poser and I wanted to post ourselves on a height above Oder- 
bruch near Wriezen to watch the last decisive offensive of this war, the 
Soviet assault on Berlin. But dense fog prevented us from seeing anything. 
After a few hours a forester brought us word that all the troops were re- 
treating and that the Russians would soon be here. So we retreated also. 

We passed by the great ship elevator of Nieder-Finow, a technical 
marvel of the thirties and the key to shipping from the Oder to Berlin. 
Everywhere along the hundred and twenty foot high iron framework 
demolition charges had been skillfully placed. We could already hear ar- 
tillery fire some distance away. A lieutenant of the Engineers reported 
that all preparations for demolition had been completed. Here people 
were still acting on Hitler's demolition order of March 19, and there was 
considerable relief at von Poser's last-moment instructions to the contrary. 
But we felt rather discouraged, for obviously the order of April 3, 1945, 
to leave waterways intact had not reached all the troops. 

With the communications network going to pieces, it seemed hope- 
less to send out new instructions via teletype. But General Heinrici's sym- 
pathy with my views prompted me to return to my plan of appealing 
directly to the public and trying to recall people to reason. Amid the con- 
fusion of the battles, I hoped, Heinrici would be able to place at my dis- 
posal one of the radio stations within the territory of his army group. 

After driving on another twenty miles Poser and I found ourselves 
in Goering's animal paradise, the lonely woods of Schorfheide. I dismissed 
my escort, sat down on the stump of a tree, and drafted a rebel's speech 
which I wrote out at one swoop. Only five days ago Hitler had censored 
my official speech to such an extent that it was no longer worth giving. 

* Of nine hundred and fifty bridges in Berlin, eighty-four were destroyed. Un- 
doubtedly this favorable result was due in part to Heinrici's attitude. In addition, two 
of my associates, Langer and Kumpf, undertook to disrupt the demolition of bridges 
even during battles. 



469 ) The Thirteenth Hour 

This time I wanted to issue a call for resistance, to bluntly forbid any 
damage to factories, bridges, waterways, railroads, and communications, 
and to instruct the soldiers of the Wehrmacht and the militia to prevent 
demolitions "with all possible means, if necessary by the use of firearms." 
The speech also called for surrendering political prisoners, which included 
the Jews, unharmed to the occupying troops, and stipulated that prisoners 
of war and foreign workers not be prevented from making their way back 
to their native lands. It prohibited Werewolf* activity and appealed to 
cities and villages to surrender without a fight. Once again I concluded 
with rather excessive solemnity that we believe "unshakably in the future 
of our nation, which will remain forever and always/' 5 

I had Poser carry a hasty note scribbled in pencil to Dr. Richard 
Fischer, general manager of die Berlin Electricity Works, to make sure 
that the supply of current to the most powerful of the German radio sta- 
tions, in Konigswusterhausen, would be continued until it was taken by 
the enemy. 6 That station, which was regularly broadcasting the Were- 
wolf messages, was as its last act supposed to broadcast my speech issuing 
a ban against Werewolf activities. 

Late that evening I met General Heinrici again; he had meanwhile 
moved his headquarters back to Dammsmuhl. There would be a brief pe- 
riod in which the radio station belonged to the "battle zone" and thus 
would have passed from government authority to that of the army— this 
was the time for me to give my speech. Heinrici, however, thought that 
the station would be occupied by the Russians before I finished talking. 
He proposed that I record the speech on a phonograph record and leave 
it with him. He would have it broadcast just before the Soviet troops 
reached the station. But in spite of all Liischen s efforts, no suitable re- 
cording apparatus could be located. 

Two days later Gauleiter Kaufmann sent me an urgent message to 
come to Hamburg; the navy was preparing to demolish the port installa- 
tions. At a conference in which the chief representatives of industry, the 
shipyards, the port authorities, and the navy participated, the Gauleiter 
made so good a case for preservation that the decision was taken to de- 
stroy nothing. 7 In a house along the Aussenalster, I continued my con- 
ference with Kaufmann alone. Well-armed students had assumed the task 
of guarding him. "It would be best for you to stay here in Hamburg with 
us," the Gauleiter urged me. "Here you're safe. We can depend on my 
men in any emergency." 

Nevertheless I drove back to Berlin and reminded Hitler that he, 

* "Werewolves" were supposed to be guerrilla fighters who would put up last- 
ditch resistance to the Allied forces in all parts of Germany. The Allies took this threat 
seriously, but after the war ended the Werewolves proved to be only another fictional 
creation of the Goebbels propaganda machine. No such resistance ever appeared. 
—Translators' note. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 47O 

who had gone down in the party's history as the "conqueror of Berlin," 
would lose his reputation if he now ended his life as the destroyer of this 
city. Ludicrous though this remark may sound, it fitted into the framework 
of ideas that we all shared at the time, particularly Goebbels, for he 
believed that he would heighten his posthumous fame by committing sui- 
cide. 

We had a situation conference on the evening of April 19. Hitler said 
that he was acceding to a proposal of Gauleiter Goebbels that all reserves 
would be committed to fighting the decisive battle outside the capital it- 
self, though at the very gates of Berlin. 



32 

Annihilation 



In the last weeks of his life, hitler seemed to have broken out of the 
rigidity which had gradually overcome him during the preceding years. 
He became more accessible again and could even tolerate the expression 
of dissent. As late as the winter of 1944, it would have been inconceivable 
for him to enter into a discussion of the prospects of the war with me. 
Then, too, his flexibility on the question of the scorched earth policy would 
have been unthinkable, or the quiet way he went over my radio speech. 
He was once more open to arguments he would not have listened to a 
year ago. But this greater softness sprang not from a relaxation of tension. 
Rather, it was dissolution. He gave the impression of a man whose whole 
purpose had been destroyed, who was continuing along his established 
orbit only because of the kinetic energy stored within him. Actually, he 
had let go of the controls and was resigned to what might come. 

There was actually something insubstantial about him. But this was 
perhaps a permanent quality he had. In retrospect I sometimes ask myself 
whether this intangibility, this insubstantiality, had not characterized him 
from early youth up to the moment of his suicide. It sometimes seems to 
me that his seizures of violence could come upon him all the more strong- 
ly because there were no human emotions in him to oppose them. He 
simply could not let anyone approach his inner being because that core 
was lifeless, empty. 

(471) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 472 

Now, he was shriveling up like an old man. His limbs trembled; he 
walked stooped, with dragging footsteps. Even his voice became quaver- 
ing and lost its old masterfulness. Its force had given way to a faltering, 
toneless manner of speaking. When he became excited, as he frequently 
did in a senile way, his voice would start breaking. He still had his fits of 
obstinacy, but they no longer reminded one of a child's temper tantrums, 
but of an old man s. His complexion was sallow, his face swollen; his uni- 
form, which in the past he had kept scrupulously neat, was often ne- 
glected in this last period of life and stained by the food he had eaten 
with a shaking hand. 

This condition undoubtedly touched his entourage, who had been at 
his side during the triumphs of his life. I too was constantly tempted to 
pity him, so reduced was he from the Hitler of the past. Perhaps that was 
the reason everyone would listen to him in silence when, in the long since 
hopeless situation, he continued to commit nonexistent divisions or to or- 
der units supplied by planes that could no longer fly for lack of fuel. Per- 
haps that was why no one said a word when he more and more frequently 
took flight from reality and entered his world of fantasy, when he spoke 
of the clash between East and West which must be on the point of erupt- 
ing—when he bade us realize that it was inevitable. Although the entou- 
rage could scarcely have been blind to the phantasmal character of these 
ideas, his constant repetitions had some sort of hypnotic effect— as when, 
for example, he claimed he was now in a position to conquer Bolshevism 
by the strength of his own personality and in alliance with the West. It 
sounded believable when he assured us that he was continuing to live 
only for this turning point, that he personally wished his last hour had 
come. The very composure with which he looked forward to the end in- 
tensified sympathy and commanded respect. 

In addition he had again become more amiable and more willing to 
drop into his private mood. In many ways he reminded me of the Hitler 
I had known at the beginning of our association twelve years before, ex- 
cept that he now seemed more shadowy. He centered his amiability on 
the few women who had been with him for years. For a long time he had 
shown special liking for Frau Junge, the widow of his servant who had 
been killed at the front; but he also favored his Viennese diet cook. His 
longtime secretaries, Frau Wolf and Frau Christian, also formed part of 
this private circle during the last weeks of his life. For months now he 
had shown a preference for taking his teas and meals with them. Scarcely 
any men still belonged among his intimates. I too had long since ceased 
to be invited to his table. The arrival of Eva Braun also introduced a num- 
ber of changes in his habits, although it did not put a stop to his probably 
innocent relations with the other women about him. He must have been 
motivated by some simple belief that women were more loyal in mis- 
fortune than men could be. Indeed, he sometimes seemed to distrust the 



473 ) Annihilation 

show of faith by the men of his staff. The exceptions were Bormann, Goeb- 
bels, and Ley, whom he seemed still to be sure of. 

Around this shadowy Hitler the apparatus of command continued to 
run mechanically. Apparently there was still some momentum here which 
went on operating even when the motor was running down. This residual 
force seemed to keep the generals moving along the same track even at 
the very end, when the radiations of Hitler's will were beginning to weak- 
en. Keitel, for example, continued to press for the destruction of bridges 
even when Hitler was now willing to spare them. 

Hitler must have noticed that the discipline in his entourage was also 
slackening. Formerly, whenever he had entered a room everybody had 
risen until he sat down. Now conversations continued, people remained 
seated, servants took their orders from guests, associates who had drunk 
too much went to sleep in their chairs, and others talked loudly and unin- 
hibitedly. Perhaps he deliberately overlooked such changes. These scenes 
affected me like a bad dream. They corresponded to the changes which 
had been taking place for several months in the Chancellor's residence: 
The tapestries had been removed, the paintings taken down from the 
walls, the carpets rolled up, and valuable pieces of furniture had been 
stowed away in an air-raid shelter. Stains on the wallpaper, gaps in the 
furnishings, scattered newspapers, empty glasses and plates, a hat that 
someone had tossed on a chair, added up to an impression of a place in the 
midst of moving day. 

For some time Hitler had abandoned the upper rooms. He claimed 
that the constant air raids disturbed his sleep and interfered with his abil- 
ity to work. In the bunker he could at least get some sleep, he said. And 
so he had converted to an underground life. 

This withdrawal into his future tomb had, for me, a symbolic signifi- 
cance as well. The isolation of this bunker world, encased on all sides by 
concrete and earth, put the final seal on Hitler's separation from the trag- 
edy which was going on outside under the open sky. He no longer had any 
relationship to it. When he talked about the end, he meant his own and 
not that of the nation. He had reached the last station in his flight from 
reality, a reality which he had refused to acknowledge since his youth. 
At the time I had a name for this unreal world of the bunker: I called it 
the Isle of the Departed. 

Even during this last period of his life, in April 1945, 1 still occasion- 
ally sat with Hitler in the bunker bent over the building plans for Linz, 
mutely contemplating the dreams of yesteryear. His study roofed with 
more than sixteen feet of concrete, then topped with six feet of earth, was 
undoubtedly the safest place in Berlin. When heavy bombs exploded in 
the vicinity this massive bunker shook, as it fortunately passed the shock 
waves on to the sandy soil of Berlin. Hitler would give a start. What had 
become of the formerly fearless corporal of the First World War? He was 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 474 

now a wreck, a bundle of nerves who could no longer conceal his reac- 
tions. 

Hitler's last birthday was not actually celebrated. Formerly on this 
day lines of cars had driven up, the honor guard had presented arms, dig- 
nitaries of the Reich and of foreign countries had offered their congratula- 
tions. Now all was quiet. For the occasion Hitler had, it is true, moved 
from the bunker to the upper rooms, which in their state of neglect pro- 
vided a fitting framework to his own lamentable condition. A delegation 
of Hitler Youth who had fought well was presented to him in the garden. 
Hitler spoke a few words, patted one or another of the boys. His voice 
was low. He broke off rather abruptly. Probably he sensed that his only 
convincing role now was as an object of pity. Most of his entourage 
avoided the embarrassment of a celebration by coming to the military sit- 
uation conference as usual. No one knew quite what to say. Hitler received 
the expressions of good wishes coolly and almost unwillingly, in keeping 
with the circumstances. 

Shortly afterward we were standing, as we had done so often, in 
the confined space of the bunker, around the situation map. Hitler had 
taken his seat facing Goering. The latter, who always made such a point 
of his attire, had changed his uniform quite remarkably in the past few 
days. To our surprise the silver-gray cloth had been replaced by the olive- 
drab of the American uniform. Along with this his two-inch wide gold- 
braided epaulets had given way to simple cloth shoulder strips to which 
his badge of rank, the golden Reich Marshal's eagle, was simply pinned. 
"Like an American general," one of the participants in the conference 
whispered to me. But Hitler seemed not to notice even this change. 

The impending attack on the center of Berlin was being discussed. 
The night before the idea had been bandied about of not defending the 
metropolis and, instead, transferring to the Alpine Redoubt. But over- 
night, Hitler had decided to fight for the city in the streets of Berlin. 
At once everyone began clamoring that it was essential to shift the head- 
quarters to Obersalzberg, and that now was the last moment remaining. 

Goering pointed out that only a single north-south route through 
the Bavarian Forest was still in our possession and that the last escape 
route to Berchtesgaden might be cut off at any time. Hitler became in- 
dignant. "How can I call on the troops to undertake the decisive battle 
for Berlin if at the same moment I myself withdraw to safety!" Goering 
in his new uniform sat pale and sweating opposite him, his eyes wide, as 
Hitler talked on, whipping himself up by his own rhetoric: "I shall leave 
it to fate whether I die in the capital or fly to Obersalzberg at the last 
moment!" 

As soon as the situation conference was over and the generals dis- 
missed, Goering turned to Hitler, utterly distraught. He had urgent tasks 



475 ) Annihilation 

awaiting him in South Germany, he said; he would have to leave Berlin 
this very night. Hitler gazed absently at him. It seemed to me that he 
was deeply moved by his decision to remain in Berlin and stake his life 
on the outcome. With a few indifferent words, he shook hands with 
Goering, giving no sign that he saw through him. I was standing only a 
few feet away from the two and had a sense of being present at a historic 
moment: The leadership of the Reich was splitting asunder. With that, 
the birthday situation conference ended. 

Along with the other participants in the conference I had left the 
room in the usual informal way, without bidding good-by to Hitler per- 
sonally. Ignoring our original intention, Lieutenant Colonel von Poser 
urged me to leave that very night. The Soviet army had launched the 
final attack on Berlin and was obviously advancing swiftly. For days all 
the preparations for our flight had been made; important baggage had 
been sent on ahead to Hamburg and two mobile homes belonging to the 
construction section of the Reichsbahn had been set up at Eutin Lake, 
near Doenitz's headquarters in Plon. 

In Hamburg, I once again visited Gauleiter Kaufmann. Like me, he 
found it beyond understanding that the struggle was being continued at 
all costs in this situation. Encouraged by these remarks, I gave him the 
draft of the speech I had written the week before, sitting on that tree 
stump. I was not sure how he would take it. "You ought to deliver this 
speech. Why haven't you done so yet?" 

After I had explained the difficulties, he suggested: "Wont you give 
it on our Hamburg station? I can vouch for the technical head of our 
radio station. At least you can have the speech recorded at the station/' 1 

That same night Kaufmann took me to the bunker in which the 
technical staff of the Hamburg station had set up their headquarters. 
After passing through deserted rooms to a small recording studio, he 
introduced me to two sound engineers who obviously already knew what 
I was up to. The thought shot through my head that within a few min- 
utes I would be completely at the mercy of these total strangers. In or- 
der to cover myself and perhaps win their complicity, I told them before 
beginning the speech that afterward they could decide whether they 
agreed with what I said or whether they wanted to destroy the disks. 
Then I sat down in front of the microphone and read my speech from 
the manuscript. The engineers said nothing; perhaps they were fright- 
ened, perhaps convinced by my words, though not to the point of de- 
claring themselves on the matter. At any rate they raised no objections. 

Kaufmann took the records. I told him the conditions under which 
he could broadcast this speech without authorization from me. Those 
conditions throw light on my state of mind in those last days of the 
Third Reich: If I were murdered at the instigation of political enemies, 
among whom I chiefly counted Bormann; if Hitler heard of my actions 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 476 

and condemned me to death; if Hitler were dead and his successor con- 
tinued his desperate policy of annihilation. 

Since General Heinrici did not intend to defend Berlin, the capture 
of the city and the end of the regime seemed likely within a few days. 
In fact Hitler, as I was informed by SS General Berger 2 and also by Eva 
Braun, had wanted to take his own life on April 22. But Heinrici had 
meanwhile been replaced by General Student, commander of the para- 
chute troops. Hitler regarded him as one of his most energetic officers 
and felt he could depend upon him all the more in this situation because 
he thought the man was rather stupid. This change in personnel alone 
revived his courage. Simultaneously, Keitel and Jodl were commanded 
to throw all available divisions into the fight for Berlin. 

At this point I myself had no work; the armaments industry no 
longer existed. Nevertheless I was driven about by an intense inner rest- 
lessness. For no good reason at all I decided to spend the night on the 
estate near Wilsnack where I had spent so many weekends with my fam- 
ily. There I met one of Dr. Brandt's assistants. He told me that Hitler's 
doctor was now being held prisoner in a villa in a western suburb of 
Berlin. He described the place, gave me the telephone number, and 
mentioned that the SS guards were not so very forbidding. We discussed 
whether I might be able to liberate Brandt in the confusion that must 
now be gripping Berlin. But I also wanted to see Liischen again. I wanted 
to persuade him to flee from the Russians, to the West. 

These were the reasons that took me to Berlin for the last time. But 
the far more powerful magnet behind these reasons was Hitler. I wanted 
to see him one last time, to tell him good-by. Now I felt as if I had stolen 
away two days before. Was that to be the end of our many years of asso- 
ciation? For many days, month after month, we had sat together over our 
joint plans, almost like co-workers and friends. For many years he had 
received my family and me at Obersalzberg and had shown himself a 
friendly, often solicitous host. 

The overpowering desire to see him once more betrays the ambiva- 
lence of my feelings. For rationally I was convinced that it was urgently 
necessary, although already much too late, for Hitler's life to come to an 
end. Underlying everything I had done to oppose him in the past months 
had been the desire to prevent the annihilation that Hitler seemed bent 
on. What could be greater proof of our antithetical aims than the speech 
I had recorded the day before, and the fact that I was now awaiting his 
death impatiently? And yet that very expectation brought out once again 
my emotional bond to Hitler. My wish to have the speech broadcast only 
after his death sprang from the desire to spare him the knowledge that 
I too had turned against him. My feelings of pity for the fallen ruler were 
growing stronger and stronger. Perhaps many of Hitler's followers had 



477 ) Annihilation 

similar emotions during these last days. On the one hand there was sense 
of duty, oath of allegiance, loyalty, gratitude— on the other hand the 
bitterness at personal tragedy and national disaster— both centered around 
one person: Hitler. 

To this day I am glad that I succeeded in carrying out my intention 
to see Hitler one last time. It was right, after twelve years of association, 
to make this gesture in spite of all antagonisms. At the time, it is true, I 
acted under an almost mechanical compulsion when I set out from Wils- 
nack. Before my departure I wrote my wife a few lines both to encourage 
her and to let her know that I did not intend to join Hitler in death. About 
fifty-five miles from Berlin a stream of vehicles heading toward Hamburg 
blocked the entire road: jalopies and limousines, trucks and delivery vans, 
motorcycles, and even Berlin fire trucks. It was impossible to thrust on 
in the face of these tens of thousands of vehicles. It was a mystery to me 
where all the fuel had suddenly come from. Probably it had been hoarded 
for months for just this crisis. 

There was a divisional staff in Kyritz. From there I telephoned the 
Villa in Berlin where Dr. Brandt was being held prisoner, awaiting execu- 
tion of the death sentence. But on special orders from Himmler, however, 
he had already been moved to northern Germany. I could not reach 
Liischen either. Nevertheless, I did not change my decision, but briefly 
informed one of Hitler's adjutants of the possibility that I would be coming 
that same afternoon. At divisional staff headquarters I had learned that the 
Soviet forces were advancing rapidly, but that encirclement of Berlin was 
not expected for a while; the airport of Gatow on the bank of the Havel 
might remain in the possession of our troops for some time. Therefore 
Poser and I went to the large Rechlin Airport in Mecklenburg, which was 
used for testing planes. Here I was well known, for I had been present at 
many flight tests, and could count on having a plane placed at my disposal. 
From this airfield fighter planes were starting out for low-level attacks 
on the Soviet troops south of Potsdam. The commandant was willing to 
have me taken in a training plane to Gatow, where two Storks, single- 
motored reconnaissance planes with low landing speed, would be held in 
readiness for the second lap of our journey. While last-minute preparations 
were made, I studied the positions of the Russian forces on the maps at 
staff headquarters. 

Escorted by a squadron of fighter planes, we flew southward at an 
altitude of somewhat over three thousand feet a few miles from the battle 
zone. Visibility was perfect. From above, the battle for the capital of the 
Reich looked innocuous. After an unmolested century and a half Berlin 
was once more being conquered by enemy troops— but it all seemed to 
be taking place in an uncannily peaceful landscape whose roads, villages, 
and small towns I knew so well from innumerable drives. All that could 
be seen were brief, inconspicuous flashes from artillery or exploding shells, 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 478 

looking no moi^e impressive than the flare of a match, and burning farm 
buildings. But on the eastern boundary of Berlin, far off in mist, larger 
billows of smoke could be discerned. The roar of the motor drowned out 
the distant noises of battle. 

The escort squadron flew on to attack ground targets south of Pots- 
dam, while we landed in Gatow. The airfield was almost deserted. Only 
General Christian, who as Jodl's assistant belonged to Hitlers staff, was 
getting ready to leave by plane. We exchanged a few trivial phrases. Then 
I and my escort entered the two Storks— enjoying the sense of adventure, 
for we could also have driven by car— and skimmed over the same route 
which I had driven with Hitler on the eve of his fiftieth birthday. To the 
surprise of the few drivers on the broad avenue, we landed just in front of 
the Brandenburg Gate. We stopped an army vehicle and had it drive us 
to the Chancellery. By this time it was late afternoon; it had taken some 
ten hours to cover the hundred miles between Wilsnack and Berlin. 

It was not at all clear to me if I was running a risk in meeting with 
Hitler. Moody as he was, I had no idea how he might feel toward me after 
these two days. But in a sense I no longer cared. Of course I hoped the 
encounter would turn out all right, but I had also to take a bad outcome 
into consideration. 

The Chancellery which I had built seven years before was already 
under fire from heavy Soviet artillery, but as yet direct hits were rela- 
tively rare. The effect of these shells seemed insignificant compared to 
the rubble that a few American daylight air raids had made of my build- 
ing during the past few weeks. I climbed over a hurdle of burned beams, 
walked under collapsing ceilings, and came to the sitting room in which, 
a few years ago, our evenings had dragged on, where Bismarck had held 
social gatherings and where Hitlers adjutant Schaub was now drinking 
brandy, in the company of a few people, few of whom I knew. In spite 
of my telephone call they had ceased expecting me and were astonished 
to see me turn up. Schaub's cordial welcome was reassuring and seemed 
to indicate that no one at headquarters knew anything about my Ham- 
burg recording. Then Schaub left us to announce my arrival. Meanwhile, 
I asked Lieutenant Colonel von Poser to enlist the aid of the Chancellery 
telephone switchboard to locate Luschen and ask him to come to the 
Chancellery. 

Hitlers adjutant returned: "The Fuehrer is ready to see you." How 
often in the past twelve years had I been ushered into Hitlers presence 
with these words. But I was not thinking of that as I descended the fifty- 
odd steps into the bunker, but if I would be ascending them with a whole 
skin. The first person I met below was Bormann. He came forward to meet 
me with such unwonted politeness that I began feeling more secure. For 
Bormann s or Schaub's expressions had always been reliable guides to Hit- 



479 ) Annihilation 

ler's mood. Humbly, he said to me: "When you speak with the Fuehrer . . . 
hell certainly raise the question of whether we ought to stay in Berlin 
or fly to Berchtesgaden. But it's high time he took over the command in 
South Germany. . . . These are the last hours when it will be possible. 
. . . You'll persuade him to fly out, won't you?" 

If there were anyone in the bunker attached to his life, it was ob- 
viously Bormann, who only three weeks earlier had enjoined the function- 
aries of the party to overcome all weaknesses, to win the victory or die 
at their posts. 3 I gave a noncommittal reply, feeling a belated sense of 
triumph at his almost imploring manner. 

Then I was led into Hitler's room in the bunker. In his welcome there 
was no sign of the warmth with which he had responded a few weeks 
before to my vow of loyalty. He showed no emotion at all. Once again 
I had the feeling that he was empty, burned out, lifeless. He assumed 
that businesslike expression which could be a mask for anything and asked 
me what I thought about Doenitz's approach to his job. I had the distinct 
feeling that he was not asking about Doenitz by chance, but that the ques- 
tion involved his successor. And to this day I think that Doenitz liquidated 
the hopeless legacy that unexpectedly became his lot with more prudence, 
dignity, and responsibility than Bormann or Himmler would have done. 
I voiced my favorable impression of the admiral, now and then enriching 
my account with anecdotes which I knew would please Hitler. But with 
the wisdom of long experience I did not try to influence him in Doenitz's 
favor, for fear that this would drive him in the opposite direction. 

Abruptly, Hitler asked me: "What do you think? Should I stay here 
or fly to Berchtesgaden? Jodl has told me that tomorrow is the last chance 
for that." 

Spontaneously, I advised him to stay in Berlin. What would he do 
at Obersalzberg? With Berlin gone, the war would be over in any case, 
I said. "It seems to me better, if it must be, that you end your life here in 
the capital as the Fuehrer rather than in your weekend house." 

Once more I was deeply moved. At the time I thought that was a 
piece of good advice. Actually it was bad, for if he had flown to Ober- 
salzberg the battle for Berlin would probably have been shortened by a 
week. 

That day he said nothing more of an imminent turning point or that 
there was still hope. Rather apathetically, wearily and as if it were al- 
ready a matter of course, he began speaking of his death: "I too have 
resolved to stay here. I only wanted to hear your view once more." With- 
out excitement, he continued: "I shall not fight personally. There is al- 
ways the danger that I would only be wounded and fall into the hands 
of the Russians alive. I don't want my enemies to disgrace my body 
either. I've given orders that I be cremated. Fraulein Braun wants to de- 
part this life with me, and I'll shoot Blondi beforehand. Believe me, 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 480 

Speer, it is easy for me to end my life. A brief moment and I'm freed of 
everything, liberated from this painful existence." 

I felt as if I had been talking with a man already departed. The 
atmosphere grew increasingly uncanny; the tragedy was approaching its 
end. 

During the last months I had hated him at times, fought him, lied to 
him, and deceived him, but at this moment I was confused and emotion- 
ally shaken. In this state, I confessed to him in a low voice, to my own 
surprise, that I had not carried out any demolitions but had actually pre- 
vented them. For a moment his eyes filled with tears. But he did not react. 
Such questions, so important to him only a few weeks before, were now 
remote. Absently, he stared at me as I faltered out my offer to stay in 
Berlin. He did not answer. Perhaps he sensed that I did not mean it. 
I have often asked myself since whether he had not always known in- 
stinctively that I had been working against him during these past months 
and whether he had not deduced this from my memoranda; also whether 
by letting me act contrary to his orders he had not provided a fresh 
example of the multiple strata in his mysterious personality. I shall never 
know. 

Just then General Krebs, the army chief of staff, was announced. He 
had come to give the situation report.* In that respect nothing had 
changed. The Commander in Chief of the armed forces was receiving 
the situation reports from the fronts as always. Only three days before 
the situation room in the bunker could hardly hold the crowd of high- 
ranking officers, commanders of various departments of the Wehrmacht 
and SS, but now almost all had left in the meantime. Along with Goering, 
Doenitz and Himmler, Keitel and Jodl, air force Chief of Staff Koller, and 
the most important officers of their staffs were now outside of Berlin. 
Only lower-ranking liaison officers had remained. And the nature of the 
report had changed. Nothing but vague scraps of news were coming from 
outside. The chief of staff could offer little more than conjectures. The 
map he spread out in front of Hitler covered only the area around Berlin 
and Potsdam. But even here the data on the status of the Soviet advance 
no longer corresponded with the observations I had made a few hours 
before. The Soviet troops had long since come closer than the map in- 
dicated. 

To my astonishment, during the conference Hitler once again tried 

* Krebs was acting for the "ill" Guderian. Hitler had officially assigned the su- 
preme command of the armed forces to Keitel and limited himself to commanding 
the troops in Berlin. But I had the impression that he did not want to recognize this 
as a fact. Even as commander of Berlin, Hitler did not leave his bunker; he issued all 
his orders from his desk. Apparently this meeting on April 23 was what was called 
a "minor" situation conference, since neither the commandant of Berlin nor the other 
troop commanders attended. 



481 ) Annihilation 

to make a display of optimism, although he had only just finished talking 
with me about his impending death and the disposition of his body. On 
the other hand, he had lost much of his former persuasiveness. Krebs 
listened to him patiently and politely. Often in the past, when the situa- 
tion was clearly desperate but Hitler continued undeterred to conjure up 
a favorable outcome, I had thought he was the captive of obsessional 
ideas. Now it became evident that he spoke two languages at once. How 
long had he been deceiving us? Since when had he realized that the strug- 
gle was lost: since the winter at the gates of Moscow, since Stalingrad, 
since the Allied invasion, since the Ardennes offensive of December 1944? 
How much was pretense, how much calculation? But perhaps it was mere- 
ly that I had just witnessed another of his rapid changes of mood and 
that he was being as sincere with General Krebs as he had earlier been 
with me. 

The situation conference, which ordinarily went on for hours, was 
quickly ended. Its very brevity revealed that this remnant of a headquar- 
ters was in its death throes. On this day Hitler even restrained from 
swooping us off into the dream world of providential miracles. We were 
dismissed with a few words and left the room in which so dreary a chapter 
of errors, omissions, and crimes had been played out. Hitler had treated 
me as an ordinary guest, as if I had not flown to Berlin especially for his 
sake. We parted without shaking hands, in the most casual manner, as if 
we would be seeing each other the next day. 

Outside the room I met Goebbels. He announced: "Yesterday the 
Fuehrer took a decision of enormous importance. He has stopped the fight- 
ing in the West so that the Anglo-American troops can enter Berlin un- 
hindered." Here again was one of those mirages which excited the minds 
of these men for a few hours and aroused new hopes which as quickly 
as they had come would be replaced by others. 

Goebbels told me that his wife and six children were now living in 
the bunker as Hitler s guests, in order, as he put it, to end their lives at 
this historic site. In contrast to Hitler, he appeared to be in fullest control 
of his thoughts and emotions. He showed no sign of having settled his 
accounts with life. 

By this time it was late afternoon. An SS doctor informed me that 
Frau Goebbels was in bed, very weak and suffering from heart attacks. 
I sent word to her asking her to receive me. I would have liked to talk to 
her alone, but Goebbels was already waiting in an anteroom and led me 
into the little chamber deep underground where she lay in a plain bed. 
She was pale and spoke only trivialities in a low voice, although I could 
sense that she was in deep agony over the irrevocably approaching 
hour when her children must die. Since Goebbels remained persistently 
at my side, our conversation was limited to the state of her health. Only 
as I was on the point of leaving did she hint at what she was really feel- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 482 

ing: "How happy I am that at least Harald pier son by her first marriage] 
is alive." I too felt confined and could scarcely find words— but what 
could anyone say in this situation? We said good-by in awkward silence. 
Her husband had not allowed us even a few minutes alone for our fare- 
well. 

Meanwhile, there was a flurry of excitement in the vestibule. A tele- 
gram had arrived from Goering, which Bormann hastily brought to 
Hitler. I trailed informally along after him, chiefly out of curiosity. In 
the telegram Goering merely asked Hitler whether, in keeping with the 
decree on the succession, he should assume the leadership of the entire 
Reich if Hitler remained in Fortress Berlin. But Bormann claimed that 
Goering had launched a coup d'etat; perhaps this was Bormann s last 
effort to induce Hitler to fly to Berchtesgaden and take control there. 
At first, Hitler responded to this news with the same apathy he had 
shown all day long. But Bormann's theory was given fresh support when 
another radio message from Goering arrived. I pocketed a copy which 
in the general confusion lay unnoticed in the bunker. It read: 

To Reich Minister von Ribbentrop: 

I have asked the Fuehrer to provide me with instructions by 10 p.m. 
April 23. If by this time it is apparent that the Fuehrer has been deprived 
of his freedom of action to conduct the affairs of the Reich, his decree of 
June 29, 1941, becomes effective, according to which I am heir to all his 
offices as his deputy. [If] by 12 midnight April 23, 1945, you receive no other 
word either from the Fuehrer directly or from me, you are to come to me at 
once by air. 

(Signed) Goering, Reich Marshal 

Here was fresh material for Bormann. "Goering is engaged in trea- 
son!" he exclaimed excitedly. "He's already sending telegrams to mem- 
bers of the government and announcing that on the basis of his powers 
he will assume your office at twelve o'clock tonight, mein Fuhrer." 

Although Hitler had remained calm when the first telegram arrived, 
Bormann now won his game. Hitler immediately stripped Goering of 
his rights of succession— Bormann himself drafted the radio message— 
and accused him of treason to Hitler and betrayal of National Socialism. 
The message to Goering went on to say that Hitler would exempt him 
from further punishment if the Reich Marshal would promptly resign all 
his offices for reasons of health. 

Bormann had at last managed to rouse Hitler from his lethargy. 
An outburst of wild fury followed in which feelings of bitterness, help- 
lessness, self-pity, and despair mingled. With flushed face and staring 
eyes, Hitler ranted as if he had forgotten the presence of his entourage: 



483 ) Annihilation 

Tve known it all along. I know that Goering is lazy. He let the air force 
go to pot. He was corrupt. His example made corruption possible in our 
state. Besides he's been a drug addict for years. I've known it all along/' 

So Hitler had known all that but had done nothing about it. 

And then, with startling abruptness, he lapsed back into his apathy: 
"Well, all right. Let Goering negotiate the surrender. If the war is lost 
anyhow, it doesn't matter who does it." That sentence expressed con- 
tempt for the German people: Goering was still good enough for the 
purposes of capitulation. 

After this crisis, Hitler had reached the end of his strength. He 
dropped back into the weary tone that had been characteristic of him 
earlier that day. For years he had overtaxed himself; for years, mustering 
that immoderate will of his, he had thrust away from himself and others 
the growing certainty of this end. Now he no longer had the energy to 
conceal his condition. He was giving up. 

About half an hour later Bormann brought in Goering's telegram 
of reply. Because of a severe heart attack Goering was resigning all his 
powers. How often before Hitler had removed an inconvenient associate 
not by dismissal, but by an allegation of illness, merely to preserve the 
German people's faith in the internal unity of the top leadership. Even 
now, when all was almost over, Hitler remained true to this habit of 
observing public decorum. 

Only now, at the very last hour, had Bormann reached his goal. 
Goering was eliminated. Possibly Bormann also was aware of Goering's 
failings; but he had hated and now overthrown the Reich Marshal sole- 
ly because he had held too much power. In a way I felt sympathy for 
Goering at this time. I recalled the conversation in which he had assured 
me of his loyalty to Hitler. 

The brief thunderstorm staged by Bormann was over; a few bars of 
Gotterdammerung had sounded and faded. The supposed Hagen had left 
the stage. To my surprise, Hitler was amenable to a request of mine, 
though I made it with considerable trepidation. Several Czech managers 
of the Skoda Works were expecting an unpleasant fate from the Russians 
because of their collaboration with us. They were probably right about 
that. On the other hand, because of their former relations with American 
industry they were placing their hopes of safety on flying to American 
headquarters. A few days before Hitler would have strictly outlawed any 
such proposal. But now he was prepared to sign an order waiving all for- 
malities so that the men could fly to safety. 

While I was discussing this point with Hitler, Bormann reminded 
him that Ribbentrop was still waiting for an audience. Hitler reacted ner- 
vously: Tve already said several times that I don't want to see him." 
For some reason the idea of meeting Ribbentrop annoyed him. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 484 

Bormann insisted: "Ribbentrop has said he wont move from the 
threshold, that he'll wait there like a faithful dog until you call him." 

This figure of speech softened Hitler; he had Ribbentrop summoned. 
They talked alone. Apparently Hitler told him about the escape plan of 
the Czech managers. But even in this desperate situation the Foreign Min- 
ister fought to defend his jurisdictional rights. In the corridor he grumbled 
to me: "That is a matter for the Foreign Office." In a somewhat milder 
tone he added: "In this particular case I have no objection if the document 
will say: 'At the suggestion of the Foreign Minister/ " I added these words, 
Ribbentrop was content, and Hitler signed the paper. This was, so far 
as I know, Hitler s last official dealing with his Foreign Minister. 

In the meantime my paternal adviser of the past few months, Fried- 
rich Liischen, had arrived at the Chancellery. But all my efforts to per- 
suade him to leave Berlin remained vain. We told each other good-by. 
Later, in Nuremberg, I learned that he had committed suicide after the 
fall of Berlin. 

Toward midnight Eva Braun sent an SS orderly to invite me to the 
small room in the bunker that was both her bedroom and living room. 
It was pleasantly furnished; she had had some of the expensive furniture 
which I had designed for her years ago brought from her two rooms in 
the upper floors of the Chancellery. Neither the proportions nor the pieces 
selected fitted into the gloomy surroundings. To complete the irony, one 
of the inlays on the doors of the chest was a four-leaf clover incorporating 
her initials. 

We were able to talk honestly, for Hitler had withdrawn. She was 
the only prominent candidate for death in this bunker who displayed an 
admirable and superior composure. While all the others were abnormal— 
exaltedly heroic like Goebbels, bent on saving his skin like Bormann, ex- 
hausted like Hitler, or in total collapse like Frau Goebbels— Eva Braun 
radiated an almost gay serenity. "How about a bottle of champagne for 
our farewell? And some sweets? I'm sure you haven't eaten in a long time." 

I was touched by her concern; she was the first person to think that 
I might be hungry after my many hours in the bunker. The orderly 
brought a bottle of Moet et Chandon, cake, and sweets. We remained 
alone. "You know, it was good that you came back once more. The Fuehrer 
had assumed you would be working against him. But your visit has proved 
the opposite to him, hasn't it?" I did not answer that question. "Anyhow, 
he liked what you said to him today. He has made up his mind to stay 
here, and I am staying with him. And you know the rest, too, of course. 
. . . He wanted to send me back to Munich. But I refused; I've come to 
end it here." 

She was also the only person in the bunker capable of humane con- 
siderations. "Why do so many more people have to be killed?" she asked. 
"And it's all for nothing. . . . Incidentally, you almost came too late. Yes- 



485 ) Annihilation 

terday the situation was so terrible it seemed the Russians would quickly 
occupy all of Berlin. The Fuehrer was on the point of giving up. But 
Goebbels talked to him and persuaded him, and so were still here." 

She went on talking easily and informally with me, occasionally burst- 
ing out against Bormann, who was pursuing his intrigues up to the last. 
But again and again she came back to the declaration that she was happy 
here in the bunker. 

By now it was about three o'clock in the morning. Hitler was awake 
again. I sent word that I wanted to bid him good-by. The day had worn 
me out, and I was afraid that I would not be able to control myself at 
our parting. Trembling, the prematurely aged man stood before me for 
the last time; the man to whom I had dedicated my life twelve years be- 
fore. I was both moved and confused. For his part, he showed no emotion 
when we confronted one another. His words were as cold as his hand: 
"So, you're leaving? Good. Auf Wiedersehen" No regards to my family, 
no wishes, no thanks, no farewell. For a moment I lost my composure, 
said something about coming back. But he could easily see that it was a 
white lie, and turned his attention to something else. I was dismissed. 

Ten minutes later, with hardly another word spoken to anyone, I 
left the Chancellor s residence. I wanted to walk once more through the 
neighboring Chancellery, which I had built. Since the lights were no 
longer functioning, I contented myself with a few farewell minutes in the 
Court of Honor, whose outlines could scarcely be seen against the night 
sky. I sensed rather than saw the architecture. There was an almost ghost- 
ly quiet about everything, like a night in the mountains. The noise of a 
great city, which in earlier years had penetrated to here even during the 
night, had totally ceased. At rather long intervals I heard the detonations 
of Russian shells. Such was my last visit to the Chancellery. Years ago I 
had built it— full of plans, prospects, and dreams for the future. Now I 
was leaving the ruins of my building, and of the most significant years of 
my life. 

"How was it?" Poser asked. 

"Thank God, I don t have to play the part of a Prince Max of Baden,"* 
I answered with relief. I had correctly interpreted Hitlers coolness at our 
parting, for six days later, in his political testament, he excluded me and 
appointed Saur, his favorite for some time, as my successor. 

The road between the Brandenburg Gate and the Victory Column 
had been converted into a runway by the use of red lanterns. Labor squads 
had filled the holes from the latest shell hits. We started without incident; 

* Prince Max of Baden was appointed Imperial Chancellor at the end of the First 
World War. In that capacity he declared the Kaiser's abdication, negotiated the Ar- 
mistice, and turned the government of Germany over to the Socialists— for all of which 
acts he was much criticized.— Translators' note. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 486 

I saw a shadow rush by the right side of the plane: the Victory Column. 
Then we were in the air, and undisturbed. In and around Berlin we saw 
many large fires, the flashes of artillery, flares that looked like fireflies. 
Still, the scene could not be compared with that produced by a single 
heavy air raid on Berlin. We headed toward a gap in the ring of artillery 
fire, where the darkness was still tranquil. Toward five o'clock, with the 
first glimmers of dawn, we arrived back at the Rechlin airfield. 

I had a fighter plane readied to deliver the Fuehrers order concerning 
the Skoda managers to Karl Hermann Frank, Hitlers deputy in Prague— I 
never did find out if the messenger arrived. Since I wanted to avoid being 
chased along the roads by low-level English fighters, I postponed driving 
to Hamburg until evening. Himmler, I heard at the airfield, was staying 
only twenty-five miles away at the hospital that had sheltered me a year 
before under such curious circumstances. We decided to visit him, landing 
in our Stork on a nearby field. Himmler was quite surprised to see me. 
He received me in the very room where I had lain during my illness, and 
to make the situation even more grotesque, Dr. Gebhardt was also present. 

As always, Himmler displayed that special brand of cordiality toward 
a fellow official which effectively cut off all intimacy. He was interested 
chiefly in my experiences in Berlin. Undoubtedly he had heard of Hitler s 
treatment of Goering by now, but he passed over it. And even when I 
somewhat hesitantly told the story of Goering's resignation, he maintained 
that it meant nothing. "Goering is going to be the successor now. WeVe 
long had an understanding that I would be his Premier. Even without 
Hitler, I can make him Chief of State. . . . You know what he's like," he 
added with a conniving smile and without the slightest embarrassment. 
"Naturally I'll be the one to make the decisions. I've already been in touch 
with various persons I mean to take into my cabinet. Keitel is coming to 
see me shortly. . . ." Perhaps Himmler assumed that I had come to see 
him to wheedle a post in his new government. 

The world in which Himmler was still moving was fantastic. "Europe 
cannot manage without me in the future either," he commented. "It will 
go on needing me as Minister of Police. After I've spent an hour with 
Eisenhower he'll appreciate that fact. They'll soon realize that they're de- 
pendent on me— or they'll have a hopeless chaos on their hands." He spoke 
of his contacts with Count Bernadotte, which involved transfer of the 
concentration camps to the International Red Cross. Now I understood 
why I had seen so many parked Red Cross trucks in the Sachsenwald 
near Hamburg. Earlier, they had always talked about liquidating all politi- 
cal prisoners before the end. Now Himmler was trying to strike some pri- 
vate bargains with the victors. Hitler himself, as my last talk with him 
had made apparent, had put such ideas far behind him. 

Finally, Himmler after all held out a faint prospect of my becoming 
a minister in his government. For my part, with some sarcasm I offered 



487 ) Annihilation 

him my plane so that he could pay a farewell visit to Hitler. But Himmler 
waved that aside. He had no time for that now, he said. Unemotionally, 
he explained: "Now I must prepare my new government. And besides, 
my person is too important for the future of Germany for me to risk the 
flight." 

The arrival of Keitel put an end to our conversation. On my way out 
I heard the Field Marshal, in the same firm voice with which he so fre- 
quently addressed high-flown sentimental declarations to Hitler, now as- 
suring Himmler of his unconditional loyalty and announcing that he was 
entirely at his disposal. 

That evening I returned to Hamburg. The Gauleiter offered to have 
my speech to the people broadcast by the Hamburg station at once, that 
is, even before Hitler s death. But as I thought of the drama that must 
be taking place during these days, these very hours, in the Berlin bunker, 
I realized that I had lost all urge to continue my opposition. Once more 
Hitler had succeeded in paralyzing me psychically. To myself, and per- 
haps to others, I justified my change of mind on the grounds that it 
would be wrong and pointless to try to intervene now in the course of the 
tragedy. 

I said good-by to Kaufmann and set out for Schleswig-Holstein. We 
moved into our trailer on Eutin Lake. Occasionally I visited Doenitz or 
members of the General Staff, who like me were at a standstill, awaiting 
further developments. Thus, I happened to be present on May 1, 1945, 
when Doenitz was handed the radio message* significantly curtailing his 
rights as Hitler's successor. Hitler had appointed the cabinet for the new 
President of the Reich: Goebbels was Chancellor; Seyss-Inquart, Foreign 
Minister; and Bormann, Party Minister. Along with this message came one 
from Bormann announcing that he would be coming to see Doenitz 
shortly. 

* The first radio message, dated April 30, 1945, 6:35 P « M - re ad: 

Grand Admiral Doenitz: 

In place of the former Reich Marshal Goering the Fuehrer has designated 
you as his successor. Written authorization on the way. Immediately take all meas- 
ures required by the present situation. 

Bormann 
The radio message sent on May 1, 1945, at 3:18 p.m. read: 

Grand Admiral Doenitz: (Top Secret! Only via officer.) 

Fuehrer deceased yesterday at 3:30 p.m. Testament of April 29 appoints you 
Reich President, Minister Goebbels Chancellor, Reichsleiter Bormann Party Min- 
ister, Minister Seyss-Inquart Foreign Minister. On the Fuehrer's instructions the 
testament sent out of Berlin to you and to Field Marshal Schorner, to assure its 
preservation for the people. Reichsleiter Bormann will try to get to you today to 
orient you on the situation. The form and time of announcement to the troops and 
public are left to you. 

Confirm receipt 

Goebbels Bormann 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 488 

"This is utterly impossible!" Doenitz exclaimed, for this made a farce 
of the powers of his office. "Has anyone else seen the radio message yet?" 

Except for the radioman and the admiral's adjutant, Liidde-Neurath, 
who had taken the message directly to his chief, no one had. Doenitz 
then ordered that the radioman be sworn to silence and the mes- 
sage locked up and kept confidential. "What will we do if Bormann and 
Goebbels actually arrive here?" Doenitz asked. Then he continued res- 
olutely: "I absolutely will not cooperate with them in any case." That 
evening we both agreed that Bormann and Goebbels must somehow be 
placed under arrest. 

Thus Hitler forced Doenitz, as his first official function, to commit 
an act of illegality: concealing an official document.* This was the last 
link in a chain of deceptions, betrayals, hypocrisies, and intrigues during 
those days and weeks. Himmler had betrayed his Fuehrer by negotiations; 
Bormann had carried off his last great intrigue against Goering by playing 
on Hitlers feelings; Goering was hoping to strike a bargain with tie Allies; 
Kaufmann had made a deal with the British and was willing to provide me 
with radio facilities; Keitel was hiring out to a new master while Hitler 
was still alive— and I myself, finally, had in the past months deceived 
the man who had discovered me and furthered my career; I had even at 
times considered how to kill him. All of us felt forced to these acts by the 
system which we ourselves represented— and forced also by Hitler, who for 
his part had betrayed us all, himself and his people. 

On this note the Third Reich ended. 

On the evening of that May 1, when Hitler's death was announced, I 
slept in a small room in Doenitzs quarters. When I unpacked my bag 
I found the red leather case containing Hitler s portrait. My secretary 
had included it in my luggage. My nerves had reached their limit. When 
I stood the photograph up, a fit of weeping overcame me. That was the 
end of my relationship to Hitler. Only now was the spell broken, the 

* Strictly speaking, Doenitz could not claim that his succession to Hitler was 
constitutionally legal, since the constitution of the German Reich would have required 
an election. Rather, his legitimacy as Hitler's successor was based on his predecessor's 
charisma, a fact which Doenitz confirmed in his public acts by constantly invoking 
Hitler's last will and testament. Thus, this first official act of Doenitz's was illegal only 
insofar as he was disregarding an important aspect of Hitler's testament after first 
assenting to it by accepting the functions of the office. 

Hitler's idea of imposing his choices of cabinet ministers on his successor was, 
by the way, one of the most absurd inspirations of his career as a statesman. Again, 
he failed to make clear, as in other cases during the past years, who was to have the 
ultimate decision-making power: the Chancellor rather than his cabinet or the Presi- 
dent. According to the letter of the testament, Doenitz could not dismiss the Chancellor 
or any of the ministers, even if they proved unfit for office. Thus, the most important 
power of any President had been denied him from the outset 



489 ) Annihilation 

magic extinguished. What remained were images of graveyards, of shat- 
tered cities, of millions of mourners, of concentration camps. Not all these 
images came into my mind at this moment, but they were there, somehow 
present in me. I fell into a deep, exhausted sleep. 

Two weeks later, staggered by the revelations of the crimes in the 
concentration camps, I wrote to the chairman of the ministerial cabinet, 
Schwerin-Krosigk: "The previous leadership of the German nation bears 
a collective guilt for the fate that now hangs over the German people. 
Each member of that leadership must personally assume his responsi- 
bility in such a way that the guilt which might otherwise descend upon 
the German people is expiated." 

With that, there began a segment of my life which has not ended to 
this day. 



EPILOGUE 



33 

Stations of Imprisonment 



Karl doenitz, the new chief of state, was still caught up in the ideas 
of the National Socialist regime, just as I was, and more than either of 
us imagined. For twelve years we had served that regime; we thought it 
would be cheap opportunism now to make a sharp turnabout. But the 
death of Hitler broke that mental bind which had for so long warped our 
thinking. For Doenitz this meant that the objectivity of the trained mili- 
tary officer came to the fore. From the moment he took over, Doenitz held 
that we should end the war as quickly as possible, and that once this task 
was done, our work was over. 

On that very May 1, 1945, one of the first military conferences took 
place between Doenitz as the new Commander in Chief of the armed 
forces and Field Marshal Ernst Busch. Busch wanted to attack the super- 
ior British forces advancing on Hamburg, while Doenitz was against any 
offensive measures. All that should be done, he said, was to keep the way 
to the West open as long as possible for the refugees from the East. Col- 
umns of them were blocked near Lubeck; a delaying action by the Ger- 
man troops in the West should be continued only to allow the flow to 
continue, Doenitz said. Busch made a great to-do about the Grand Ad- 
miral's no longer acting in Hitler's spirit. But Doenitz was no longer 
moved by such exhortations. 

The day before, in a dispute with the new Chief of State, Himmler 
had been made to understand that there was no place for him in the new 

( 493 ) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 494 

government. Nevertheless, the next day he turned up unannounced at 
Doenitz's headquarters. It was around noon, and Doenitz invited Himmler 
and me to dine with him— though not out of any special friendliness. 
However much he disliked Himmler, Doenitz would have regarded it as 
discourteous to treat a man who had so recently held so much power with 
contempt. Himmler brought the news that Gauleiter Kaufmann intended 
to surrender Hamburg without a fight. A leaflet addressed to the populace 
was now being printed, Himmler said, to prepare the way for the im- 
pending entrance of British troops into the city. Doenitz was angry. If 
everyone acted on his own, he said, his assignment no longer had any 
point. I offered to drive to Hamburg to talk with Kaufmann. 

Kaufmann, well protected in his headquarters by his bodyguard of 
students, was no less agitated than Doenitz. The commandant of the city 
had received orders to fight for Hamburg, he told me. But the British had 
issued an ultimatum that if Hamburg were not surrendered, they would 
order the heaviest bombing the city had ever received. "Am I supposed 
to follow the example of the Gauleiter of Bremen?" Kaufmann continued. 
"He issued a proclamation calling on the people to defend themselves to 
the last, and then cleared out while the city was demolished by a frightful 
air raid." He was so determined to prevent a battle for Hamburg, Kauf- 
mann told me, that if necessary he would mobilize the masses to active 
resistance against the defenders of the city. 

I telephoned Doenitz and told him of the threat of open rebellion in 
Hamburg. Doenitz asked time to consider. About an hour later he issued 
the order to the commandant to surrender the city without a fight. 

On April 21, at the time I was recording my speech at the Hamburg 
radio station, Kaufmann had proposed that the two of us let ourselves 
be taken prisoner together. Now he renewed this offer. But I rejected this 
idea, as I also did the plan for a temporary flight which our champion 
dive-bomber pilot, Werner Baumbach, had earlier suggested to me. Baum- 
bach had the use of a long-range four-motored seaplane which throughout 
the war had plied between northern Norway and a German weather sta- 
tion in Greenland to supply the station with provisions. Baumbach pro- 
posed that we use it to take me and a few friends to one of the many quiet 
bays of Greenland for the first few months after the occupation of Ger- 
many. Boxes of books were already packed, as well as medicines, writing 
materials, and a great deal of paper (for I wanted to start on my memoirs 
without delay). We would also take along rifles, my faltboat, skis, tents, 
hand grenades for fishing, and food.* Ever since seeing the Udet film 
SOS Iceberg I had dreamed of a lengthy vacation in Greenland. But since 

* In those days Greenland seemed so distant and isolated that even intensive air 
reconnaissance scarcely seemed a real threat. The supply planes for these weather 
stations could carry enough fuel to fly to England, where we planned to turn ourselves 
in late in the fall of 1945. 



495 ) Stations of Imprisonment 

Doenitz was now head of the government, I canceled this plan, with its 
combination of panic and rank romanticism. 

Burning oil trucks and automobiles shot up only minutes before lay 
by the side of the road, with English fighter planes flying overhead, as 
I drove back to Eutin Lake. In Schleswig the traffic was heavier, a jumble 
of military vehicles, civilian cars, columns of people on foot, some soldiers, 
some civilians. When I was occasionally recognized, no one said anything 
angry. There was an air of friendly, regretful constraint about the way 
people greeted me. 

I arrived at the headquarters in Hon on the evening of May 2. 
Doenitz had already moved to Flensburg to evade the rapidly advancing 
British troops. But I met Keitel and Jodl, who were on the point of leaving 
to join their new master. Doenitz had taken up quarters on the passenger 
ship Patria. We had breakfast together in the captain's cabin, and there 
I presented him with an edict prohibiting the destruction of any facilities, 
including bridges. He promptly signed it. Thus I had achieved at last 
every point of the program I had demanded of Hitler on March 19— al- 
though it was now far too late. 

Doenitz at once saw the merit of my making a speech urging the 
German people in the areas already captured by the enemy to hurl all 
their energies into reconstruction. The speech was intended to counteract 
the lethargy "which has come over the people as a result of the paralyzing 
horror and the immeasurable disillusionment of recent months." All Doe- 
nitz asked was that I show the speech to Schwerin-Krosigk, the new For- 
eign Minister, at the present headquarters of the government, the naval 
school at Miirwik near Flensburg. Schwerin-Krosigk also agreed to the 
broadcast if I would add a few sentences to explain the present policy of 
the government. He dictated these to me.* The only stations in our pos- 
session which could still broadcast, Copenhagen and Oslo, were hooked 
in when I read the speech in the Flensburg studio. 

When I stepped out of the broadcasting studio, I found Himmler 
waiting for me. We still held valuable territories such as Norway and 
Denmark, he reminded me self -importantly, territories which we could 
regard as pledges for our security. These were of sufficient importance 
to the enemy so that we could negotiate concessions for ourselves in ex- 
change for the assurance that we would surrender them intact. My speech 

* It was an abridged version of the speech I had recorded at the Hamburg radio 
station on April 21, 1945. The addition requested by Schwerin-Krosigk read: "Only 
for this reason [to avoid casualties in the civilian population] does the Grand Admiral 
feel compelled to continue the fighting. The sole purpose of the struggle which is 
still being waged is to prevent the Germans fleeing from the Soviet armies, or threat- 
ened by them, from perishing. This last obligation in Germany's heroic struggle is 
what our people, who have borne all the sufferings of this war so gallantly, must now 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 496 

suggested that we would hand over these areas without a fight and with- 
out asking anything in return; it was consequently a harmful speech, 
Himmler argued. He then surprised Keitel by proposing that a censor be 
installed to pass on all public announcements of the government; he 
himself would be glad to assume this task. But that same day Doenitz 
had already rejected similar suggestions from Terboven, Hitler's governor 
in Norway. On May 6, Doenitz signed an order prohibiting demolitions 
of any kind in the still occupied territories, parts of Holland and Czecho- 
slovakia, Denmark and Norway. This was the final rejection of any policy 
of pledges, as Himmler called it. 

In the same spirit the Grand Admiral said no to any plan to transfer 
himself and the new government to Denmark or Prague, despite the fact 
that Flensburg might be occupied by the British any day. Himmler in 
particular felt drawn to Prague. An old imperial city, he urged, was more 
fitting as the headquarters of a government than historically insignificant 
Flensburg. He omitted to add that by moving to Prague we would be 
passing from the sphere where the navy held power into the sphere of 
the SS. Doenitz finally cut off the discussion by stating flatly that we would 
certainly not continue our activities beyond the German borders. "If the 
British want to capture us here, let them do it!" 

Himmler then began pressing Baumbach, who had been placed in 
charge of the government air squadron, to provide him with a plane so 
that he could escape to Prague. Baumbach and I decided that we would 
land him on an airfield already held by the enemy. But Himmler's intel- 
ligence service was still functioning. "When people fly in your planes," he 
snarled at Baumbach, "they don't know where they're going to land." 

A few days later, as soon as communications with Field Marshal 
Montgomery had been established, Himmler gave Jodl a letter asking 
him to have it passed on to Montgomery. As General Kinzl, the liaison 
officer to the British forces, told me, Himmler asked for an interview with 
the British Field Marshal under a safe-conduct. Should he be taken pris- 
oner he wanted it established that by the laws of war he had a right to 
be treated as a high-ranking general— since he had been Commander in 
Chief of the Vistula Army Group. But this letter never arrived. Jodl de- 
stroyed it, as he told me in Nuremberg. 

As happens in critical situations, those days revealed the characters 
of men. Gauleiter Koch of East Prussia, at one time Reich Commissioner 
for the Ukraine, arrived in Flensburg to demand a submarine so that he 
could escape to South America. Gauleiter Lohse made the same demand. 
Doenitz flatly refused. Rosenberg, now the oldest Reichsleiter of the Na- 
tional Socialist party, wanted to dissolve the party. He alone had the 
right to issue such an order, he declared. A few days later he was found 
almost lifeless in Miirwik. He spoke of having poisoned himself, and a 
suicide attempt was suspected, but it turned out that he was merely drunk. 



497 ) Stations of Imprisonment 

On the other hand some manifested courageous attitudes. A good 
many of the leaders refrained from disappearing into the masses of refu- 
gees swarming into Holstein. Seyss-Inquart, the Reich Commissioner for 
the Occupied Netherlands, rode a PT boat through the enemy block- 
ade at night to confer with Doenitz and me, but he refused the chance 
to remain at the seat of government and returned to Holland in his PT 
boat. "My place is there," he said mournfully. 'Til be arrested immediately 
after my return." 

On May 4 came the armistice in northwest Germany, followed three 
days later, on May 7, 1945, by the unconditional surrender in all the 
theaters of war. A day later that capitulation was again solemnly sealed 
by the signatures of Keitel and three representatives of the branches of 
the Wehrmacht at the Soviet headquarters in Karlshorst, near Berlin. 
After the signing the Soviet generals, whom Goebbels's propaganda had 
always represented as barbarians without manners or knowledge of civil- 
ized conduct, served the German delegation a good meal, complete with 
champagne and caviar, as Keitel told us.* Keitel obviously had no feeling 
that after such a step, which meant the end of the Reich and imprison- 
ment for millions of soldiers, it would have been in better taste to refuse 
the champagne on the victor s table and have taken only what was neces- 
sary to still the pangs of hunger. His gratification at this gesture on the 
part of the victors testified to a sad lack of dignity and sense of decorum. 
But after all, it had already been much the same at Stalingrad. 

The British troops encircled Flensburg. There was now only a tiny 
enclave in which our government still had executive authority. The "Con- 
trol Commission for the OKW," under Major General Rooks, installed it- 
self on the Patria and soon began functioning as a liaison office to the 
Doenitz government. To my mind, the capitulation meant that the Doenitz 
government had done its job in bringing the lost war to an end. On May 
7, 1945, 1 proposed that we issue a last proclamation to the effect that since 
we no longer had any freedom of action, all we could do was to wind up 
such matters that had arisen out of the surrender. "We expect that the 
enemy will nevertheless call us to account for our former activities exactly 
like all the other responsible members of the National Socialist regime." 
In making this remark I wanted to forestall any misinterpretation of our 
gesture. 1 

However, State Secretary Stuckardt, now heading the Ministry of the 
Interior, took a different view. He wrote a memorandum stating that 
Doenitz as Chief of State and legitimate successor to Hitler had no right 

* On May 6, 1945, the Berliner Zeitung printed a report from Chuikov's head- 
quarters: "After the signing Keitel and his companions were treated to caviar, vodka, 
and champagne in the villa placed at their disposal. The meal differed in no respect 
from the Allies' banquet." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 498 

to surrender his position; he must hold it so that the continuity of the 
German Reich would be preserved and the legitimacy of future govern- 
ments would not be imperiled. Doenitz, though at first more disposed to 
follow my line, agreed with Stuckardt. Thus, the continuance of his gov- 
ernment was assured for a whole fifteen days more. 

The first British and American newspapermen arrived, and each 
of their stories aroused unrealistic hopes of the most varied kind. Simul- 
taneously, SS uniforms vanished. Overnight Wegener, Stuckardt and 
Ohlendorf had become civilians. Gebhardt, Himmlers intimate, actually 
transformed himself into a Red Cross general. Moreover a government 
structure began to arise— a consequence of its members having nothing 
to do. Doenitz, in the old fashion of Imperial Germany, appointed a Chief 
of the Military Cabinet (Admiral Wagner) and a Chief of the Civilian 
Cabinet (Gauleiter Wegener). After some debate it was resolved that the 
Chief of State would continue to be addressed by the title of Grand Ad- 
miral. An information service was set up: An old radio set provided the 
latest news. Even one of Hitler s big Mercedes limousines had found its 
way to Flensburg and served to convey Doenitz to his home all of five 
hundred yards from the offices of the government. A photographer from 
Heinrich Hoffmann's studio appeared to take pictures of the new govern- 
ment at work. I remarked to Doenitz's adjutant that the tragedy was 
turning into a tragicomedy. Correctly as Doenitz had acted up to the 
capitulation and sensibly as he had worked to bring the war to a quick 
end, he was now complicating everything and our situation in a totally 
confusing manner. Two members of the new government, Ministers Backe 
and Dorpmiiller, had vanished without a trace. Rumor said they had been 
taken to Eisenhowers headquarters to begin drafting measures for the 
reconstruction of Germany. Field Marshal Keitel, still chief of the High 
Command of the armed forces, was taken prisoner. Our government was 
not only impotent; the victors did not deign to notice it. 

We composed memoranda in a vacuum, trying to offset our unim- 
portance by sham activity. Every morning at ten a cabinet meeting took 
place in the so-called Cabinet Room, a former schoolroom. It looked as 
if Schwerin-Krosigk was trying to make up for all the cabinet meetings 
that had not been held during the past twelve years. We used a painted 
table and chairs collected from around the school. At one of these ses- 
sions the acting Minister of Food brought a few bottles of rye from his 
stores. We fetched glasses and cups from our rooms and discussed how 
to reshuffle the cabinet to bring it in line with the changing times. A 
hot debate arose over the question of adding a Minister for Churches to 
the cabinet. A well-known theologian was proposed for the post, while 
others regarded Pastor Niemoller as the best candidate. After all, the 
cabinet ought to be made "socially acceptable." My tart suggestion that 
a few leading Social Democrats and liberals be brought forth to take over 



499 ) Stations of Imprisonment 

our functions went unnoticed. The Food Minister's stocks helped to liven 
the mood of the meeting. We were, I thought, well on the way to making 
ourselves ridiculous; or rather, we already were ridiculous. The serious- 
ness that had prevailed in this building during the surrender had vanished. 
On May 15, I wrote Schwerin-Krosigk that the government of the 
Reich must consist of people who could enjoy the confidence of the 
Allies; the composition of the cabinet must be changed and the closer 
associates of Hitler replaced. Moreover, I said, it was "as foolish to 
entrust an artist with paying off debts as— in the past— to put a cham- 
pagne salesman in charge of the Foreign Ministry." I asked to "be relieved 
of the affairs of the Minister of Economics and Production." I received no 
reply. 

After the capitulation subordinate officers of the American and 
British forces turned up here and there and moved around unabashed 
in rooms where our "seat of government" was located. One day in the 
middle of May an American lieutenant appeared in my room. "Do you 
know where Speer is?" he asked. When I identified myself, he ex- 
plained that American headquarters was accumulating data on the 
effects of the Allied bombings. Would I be willing to provide informa- 
tion? I said I would. 

A few days earlier the Duke of Holstein had offered me the Castle 
of Glucksburg, several miles from Flensburg, as quarters for me and my 
family. That same day I sat in the sixteenth-century castle, built out into 
the water, with several civilians of my age belonging to the USSBS, the 
United States Strategic Bombing Survey, who were attached to Eisen- 
hower's staff. We discussed the mistakes and peculiarities of the bomb- 
ings on both sides. The next morning my adjutant reported that many 
American officers, including a high-ranking general, had arrived at the 
entrance to the castle. Our guard of soldiers from a German armored 
force presented arms,* and so— under the protection of German arms, as 
it were— General F. L. Anderson, commander of the bombers of the Ameri- 
can Eighth Air Force, entered my apartment. He thanked me in the most 
courteous fashion for taking part in these discussions. 

For three days more we went systematically through the various 
aspects of the war in the air. On May 19 Chairman Franklin d'Olier of the 
USSBS, along with his vice-chairman, Henry C. Alexander, and his as- 
sistants, Dr. Galbraith, Paul Nitze, George Ball, Colonel Gilkrest, and 
Williams, visited. From my own work I could appreciate the great im- 
portance of this division for the American military operations. 

* Even after the cease-fire, the German troops around Doenitz's government seat 
were allowed to bear light arms. At this meeting I stated, according to the minutes 
for May 19, 1945, that "I have no need of collecting credits in order to avert misin- 
terpretations of my actions. The political aspects will be examined by other quarters." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 500 

During the next several days an almost comradely tone prevailed in 
our "university of bombing." It came to a sudden end when Goering's 
champagne breakfast with General Patton produced banner headlines all 
over the world. But before that happened General Anderson paid me the 
most curious and flattering compliment of my career: "Had I known what 
this man was achieving, I would have sent out the entire American Eighth 
Air Force merely to put him underground." That air force had at its dis- 
posal more than two thousand heavy daylight bombers. It was lucky Gen- 
eral Anderson found out too late. 

The place where my family was staying was twenty-five miles from 
Glucksburg. Since the worst that could happen was that I would be ar- 
rested a few days earlier, I drove out of the enclave around Flensburg 
and thanks to the careless unconcern of the British reached the occupied 
zone without trouble. The British soldiers who were strolling in the streets 
paid no attention to my car. Heavy tanks stood in the villages, their 
cannon protected by canvas hoods. So I arrived safely at the door of the 
country house where my family was staying. We were all delighted at 
this prank, which I was able to repeat several times. But perhaps I strained 
British nonchalance too much after all. On May 21, I was taken back to 
Flensburg in my car and locked in a room at Secret Service headquarters, 
watched over by a soldier with an automatic rifle on his knees. After a 
few hours I was released. My car had vanished; the British took me back 
to Glucksburg in one of their cars. 

Early in the morning two days later my adjutant came rushing into 
my bedroom. The British had surrounded Glucksburg. A sergeant entered 
my room and announced that I was a prisoner. He unbuckled his belt 
with its pistol, laid it casually on my table, and left the room to give me 
an opportunity to pack my things. Soon afterward a truck brought me 
back to Flensburg. As we rode off I could see that many antitank guns 
were trained on Glucksburg Castle. They still thought I might be capable 
of far more than I was. Shortly afterward the Reich war flag, which had 
been raised every day at the naval school, was taken down by the British. 
If anything proved that the Doenitz government, try though it might, 
was not a new beginning, it was the persistence of this flag. As a matter 
of fact, at the beginning of our days in Flensburg, Doenitz and I had 
agreed that the flag must remain. We could not pretend to represent any- 
thing new, I thought. Flensburg was only the last stage of the Third 
Reich, nothing more. 

Under normal circumstances a fall from the heights of power might 
be attended by grave inner crises. But to my astonishment the fall took 
place without any perceptible turmoil. I also adapted quickly to the conr 
ditions of imprisonment. I ascribe that to my twelve years of training in 



501 ) Stations of Imprisonment 

subordination. For in my own mind I had already been a prisoner under 
Hitler s regime. Relieved at last of the responsibility for daily decisions, 
I was overpowered during the early months by a craving for sleep such 
as I had never felt before. A slackening of the mind took place, although 
I tried not to let it show. 

In Flensburg all of us, the members of the Doenitz government, met 
again in a room that resembled a waiting room. There we sat on benches 
along the walls, each of us surrounded by suitcases with his personal 
possessions. We must have looked much like emigrants waiting for their 
ship. A melancholy mood prevailed. One by one we were summoned to 
an adjoining room to be registered as prisoners. Depending on their dis- 
positions, the new prisoners returned angry, insulted, or depressed. When 
my turn came, I too was affronted by the embarrassing physical examina- 
tion to which I was subjected. Probably it was a consequence of Himm- 
ler's suicide; he had kept a poison pill concealed in his gum. 

Doenitz, Jodl, and I were led into a small courtyard in which a 
dramatically large number of machine guns were directed toward us from 
the windows of the upper floor. Newspaper photographers and movie 
cameramen had their turn, while I tried to give the impression that this 
spectacle, which was intended only for the newsreels, did not concern 
me at all. Then we were squeezed into several trucks along with the others 
from the waiting room. Ahead of us and behind us, as I could see at 
curves in the road, we had an escort of thirty to forty armored vehicles— 
a rare honor for me, accustomed as I was to driving around in my car 
alone and without protection. At an airport we were loaded into two two- 
motored cargo planes. Sitting on suitcases and crates, we already very 
much looked our part of "captives." We were not informed of our destina- 
tion. It took some getting used to, the fact that we would never know 
where we were being moved to, after so many years in which we had 
taken it for granted that we were the ones who determined our destina- 
tions. On only two of these journeys was the end completely clear: the 
one to Nuremberg and the one to Spandau. 

We flew over coastal landscapes and then for a long time over the 
North Sea. Were we bound for London? The plane veered to the south. 
To judge by the look of the land and the cities we were over France. 
A large city appeared. Reims, some insisted. But it was Luxembourg. The 
plane landed; outside a cordon of American soldiers was drawn up in 
two rows. Each of them had his automatic rifle trained on the narrow 
lane which we would walk between them. I had seen such a reception 
only in gangster films when the criminals are finally led off to justice. In 
open trucks, seated on crude wooden benches and guarded by soldiers 
again with their guns at the ready, we were taken through several vil- 
lages where the people in the streets whistled and shouted at us, epithets 
we could not make out. The first stage of my imprisonment had begun. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 502 

We stopped at a large building, the Palace Hotel in Mondorf, and 
were led into the lobby. From outside we had been able to see Goering 
and other former members of the leadership of the Third Reich pacing 
back and forth. The whole hierarchy was there: ministers, Field Marshals, 
Reichsleiters, state secretaries, and generals. It was a ghostly experience 
to find all those who at the end had scattered like chaff in the wind re- 
assembled here. I kept to one side, eager to absorb as much as possible 
of the quiet of the place. Just once I spoke to Kesselring, asking him why 
he had continued to blow up bridges instead of sparing them after the 
command communications to Hitler had been broken. With his inflexible 
military mentality he replied that bridges had to be destroyed as long as 
fighting was going on; as Commander in Chief nothing concerned him 
but the safety of his soldiers. 

Soon quarrels over rank began. Goering was Hitler's proclaimed suc- 
cessor of earlier years, Doenitz the Chief of State whom Hitler had ap- 
pointed at the last moment; but as Reich Marshal, Goering was also the 
highest-ranking military officer. There was a muffled battle between the 
new Chief of State and the deposed successor over the question of who 
should take precedence in the Palace Hotel of Mondorf (which had been 
emptied of all persons but ourselves and our guards) and who in general 
was top dog of us all. No agreement could be reached. Soon the two 
principals avoided meeting at the door, while each took the presiding seat 
at two different tables in the dining room. Goering especially never forgot 
his station. When Dr. Brandt once casually referred to all he had lost, 
Goering interrupted snappishly: "Oh, come, don't you talk! You haven't 
any reason to complain. After all, what did you havel But II When I'd had 
so much. . . ." 

Barely two weeks after we were taken to Mondorf I was told that I 
was going to be transferred. From then on the Americans treated me with 
just a shade of respect. Many of my fellow prisoners interpreted this 
transfer overoptimistically as a call to assist in the reconstruction of Ger- 
many, for they were not yet used to the idea that things really could be 
managed without us. I was delegated to bring regards to friends and rela- 
tives. A car waited outside the entrance to the Palace Hotel, not a truck 
this time but a limousine, and my guard was not an MP with a submachine 
gun but a lieutenant who saluted courteously. We drove westward past 
Reims toward Paris. In the center of the city the lieutenant got out at an 
administration building and soon returned equipped with a map and fresh 
orders. We headed upstream along the Seine. In my confusion I thought 
that we were making for the Bastille, quite forgetting that it had long 
ago been torn down. But the lieutenant became uneasy; he compared 
street names until I realized with relief that he had lost his way. Clumsily, 
in my school English, I offered to pilot us; but it was only with some 



503 ) Stations of Imprisonment 

hesitation that he told me our destination was the Trianon Palace Hotel 
in Versailles. I knew the way there well; it was where I had stayed in 
1937 when I was designing the German pavilion for the Paris World's 
Fair. 

Luxury cars and honor guards at the doors indicated that this hotel 
was no prison camp but had been taken over by the Allied staffs. It was 
actually Eisenhower's headquarters. The lieutenant vanished inside while 
I sat quietly watching the spectacle of high-ranking generals driving up. 
After a long wait a sergeant conducted us down an avenue. We drove 
past several meadows straight toward a small palace whose gates opened 
for us. 

For several weeks I stayed at Chesnay. I ended up in a small room 
on the third floor of the rear wing. Its appointments were spartan: an army 
cot and a chair. The window was laced over with barbed wire. An armed 
guard was posted at the door. 

The next day I had the opportunity to admire our little palace from 
the front. Surrounded by ancient trees, it was situated in a small park 
beyond whose high wall the adjacent gardens of the Palace of Versailles 
could be glimpsed. Fine eighteenth-century sculptures created an idyllic 
atmosphere. I was allowed a half-hour walk every day; an armed soldier 
followed me. We were forbidden to make contact with the other pris- 
oners, but after a few days I learned a bit about them. They were almost 
exclusively leading technicians and scientists, agricultural and railroad 
specialists, among them former Minister Dorpmiiller. I recognized Pro- 
fessor Heinkel, the aircraft designer, as well as one of his assistants. I also 
caught glimpses of many other people with whom I had worked. A week 
after my arrival my permanent guard was withdrawn, and I was allowed 
to walk about freely. With that, the monotonous period of solitude came 
to an end and my psychological state improved. New prisoners arrived: 
various members of my Ministry, among them Frank and Saur. We were 
also joined by technical officers of the American and British forces, who 
wanted to expand their knowledge of German conditions. My assistants 
and I agreed that we ought to place our experience in the technology of 
armaments at their disposal. 

I could not contribute very much; Saur had by far the better knowl- 
edge of details. I was extremely grateful to the commandant, a British 
parachute major, when he rescued me from this dreary interim by inviting 
me to take a drive with him. 

We drove past small palace gardens and parks to Saint-Germain, 
the beautiful creation of Francis I, and from there along the Seine toward 
Paris. We passed the Coq Hardi, the famous restaurant in Bougival where 
I had spent pleasant evenings with Cortot, Vlaminck, Despiau, and other 
French artists, and reached the Champs Elysees. Here the major proposed 
a stroll, but I said no in his interest; there was always the chance I might 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 504 

be recognized. Crossing the Place de la Concorde we turned into the 
quais along the Seine. There fewer people were about; we ventured a 
walk and then returned by way of Saint-Cloud to our palatial prison camp. 
A few days later a large bus drew up in the prison yard. A whole 
busload of "tourists" was quartered with us, among them Schacht and 
General Thomas, the former chief of the Armaments Office. Also among 
the bus passengers were prominent prisoners from German concentration 
camps who had been liberated by the Americans in South Tyrol, taken 
to Capri, and then transferred to our camp. Word went around that Pastor 
Niemoller was among them. We did not know him personally, but among 
the new arrivals was a frail old man, white-haired and wearing a black 
suit. The designer Flettner, Heinkel, and I agreed he must be Niemoller. 
We felt great sympathy for this man so visibly marked by many years of 
concentration camp. Flettner took it upon himself to go over to the broken 
man and express our sympathy. But he had no sooner addressed him 
than he was corrected: "Thyssen! My name is Thyssen. Niemoller is stand- 
ing over there." And there he stood, looking youthful and self-possessed, 
smoking a pipe— an extraordinary example of how the pressures of long 
imprisonment can be withstood. Later, I often thought about him. The 
bus drove into the palace courtyard again a few days later and whisked 
its former passengers off again. Only Thyssen and Schacht were left be- 
hind with us. 

When Eisenhowers headquarters was shifted to Frankfurt, a column 
of some ten American military trucks appeared at our quarters. We pris- 
oners were assigned our places in two open trucks with wooden benches. 
The other trucks took the furnishings. As we passed through Paris, at 
every traffic stop a crowd assembled shouting insults and threats. East of 
Paris we paused in a meadow for a midday rest. Guards and prisoners 
mingled— a peaceful scene. Our first day's destination was supposed to be 
Heidelberg. I was glad when we did not make it that night, for it would 
have pained me to be in prison in my home town. 

The next day we reached Mannheim. The city seemed lifeless; the 
streets were deserted, the buildings shattered. A German private in torn 
uniform, his face roughly bearded, a cardboard carton on his back, stood 
dully by the side of the road: the image of defeat. At Nauheim we turned 
off the autobahn. Soon afterward we began climbing a steep road and 
ended up in Kransberg Castle. In the winter of 1939, I had fitted out and 
rebuilt this large castle, three miles from Hitler's command center, as a 
headquarters for Goering. A two-story wing had been added for Goering's 
large staff of servants, and we prisoners were now quartered in this annex. 

Here, in contrast to Versailles, there was no barbed wire. Even the 
windows on the top floor of our servants' wing provided a clear view 
of the landscape. The wrought-iron gate which I had designed was not 



505 ) Stations of Imprisonment 

locked. We were allowed to move about freely in the whole area of the 
castle. Five years before I had laid out an orchard above the castle, sur- 
rounded by a wall some three feet high. Here we could sprawl at ease, 
with a grand view of the Taunus woods and far below us the village of 
Kransberg with its gently smoking chimneys. 

Compared with our fellow countrymen, who were going hungry in 
their freedom, we were inappropriately well off, for we received the same 
rations as American troops. But in the village, the prison camp had a bad 
reputation. Apparently the surrounding populace believed we were being 
beaten and starved; rumor had it that Leni Riefenstahl was pining away 
in the dungeon of the tower. Actually we had been brought to this castle 
to answer questions on the technical conduct of the war. It was the gather- 
ing point for all kinds of specialists: almost the entire leadership of my 
Ministry, most of my department heads, most of the leading men in muni- 
tions, tank, automobile, ship, aircraft, and textile production, the important 
figures in chemistry, and such designers as Professor Porsche. But inter- 
rogators seldom found their way to us. The prisoners grumbled, for most 
of them rightly hoped that once they had been pumped dry of information 
they would be released again. Wernher von Braun and his assistants 
joined us for a few days. He had received offers from the United States 
and England for himself and his staff, and we discussed these. The Rus- 
sians, too, had contrived to use the kitchen staff at the heavily guarded 
Garmisch camp to smuggle an offer of a contract to him. 

For the rest, we banished boredom by early-morning sports, a series 
of scientific lectures, and once Schacht recited poetry, giving astonishingly 
emotional renderings. A weekly cabaret was also conjured up. We watched 
the performances— the scenes repeatedly dealt with our own situation— 
and sometimes tears of laughter ran down our faces at the tumble we had 
taken. 

One morning, shortly after six o'clock, one of my former assistants 
roused me from sleep: "I've just heard on the radio that you and Schacht 
are going to be tried at Nuremberg!" I tried to keep my composure, but 
the news hit me hard. Much as I believed in principle that as one of the 
leaders of the regime I must take responsibility for its crimes, it was hard 
for me at first to adjust to the reality. I had felt some trepidation at seeing 
photographs of the interior of Nuremberg prison in the newspaper. Weeks 
ago I had read that some of the chief members of the government had 
been put there. But while my fellow defendant Schacht soon had to ex- 
change our pleasant prison camp for the jail at Nuremberg, weeks were 
to pass before I was taken there. 

Although this meant that I was facing charges of the gravest sort, 
one would never have known it from the behavior of the guards toward 
me. The Americans said cheerily: "You'll soon be acquitted and the whole 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 506 

thing forgotten." Sergeant Williams increased my rations so that, as he 
said, I would have my strength for the trial, and the British commandant 
invited me for a drive the day we met. We drove alone, without guards, 
through the Taunus woods, lay down for a while under a huge fruit tree, 
tramped about the woods, and he told me about hunting bears in Kashmir. 
It was beautiful September weather. Toward the end of the month 
an American jeep swung in through the gate: the squad that had come 
to get me. At first the British commandant refused to turn over his prisoner 
before he had received orders from Frankfurt. Sergeant Williams pro- 
vided me with innumerable biscuits and asked repeatedly whether I 
needed anything from his stores. By the time I finally entered the jeep, 
almost the entire camp community had assembled in the castle yard. 
Everyone wished me well. I shall never forget the kindly and troubled 
expression in the eyes of the British colonel as he bade me good-by. 



34 

Nurember: 



g 



That evening i was delivered to the notorious interrogation camp 
of Oberursel near Frankfurt, greeted with crude mocking jokes by the 
sergeant in charge, and fed a thin, watery soup with which I nibbled my 
British biscuits. I thought nostalgically of beautiful Kransberg. That night 
I heard the rough shouts of the American guards, anxious replies and 
screams. In the morning a German general was led past me under guard, 
his face weary and desperate. 

Finally, we were moved on in a canvas-covered truck. I sat squeezed 
in tightly with others; among them I recognized the Mayor of Stuttgart, 
Dr. Strolin, and Admiral Horthy, the Regent of Hungary. We were not 
told our destination, but it was obvious: Nuremberg. We arrived there 
after dark. A gate was opened; I stood for some minutes in the corridor of 
a block of cells which I had seen in the newspaper a few weeks earlier. 
Before I knew it, I was locked into one of them. Opposite me, Goering 
peeped out the opening 1 in his cell door and shook his head. A straw pal- 
let, tattered and filthy old blankets, impassive indifferent guards. Although 
all four floors of the building were occupied, an eerie silence prevailed, 
interrupted only by the occasional clang of a cell door when a prisoner 
was led off for interrogation. Goering, across the corridor from me, walked 
endlessly back and forth in his cell; at regular intervals I saw part of his 
massive body passing the peephole. Soon, I too began pacing my cell, at 
first back and forth and then, the better to utilize the space, around and 
around. 

( 507 ) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 508 

After about a week during which I was ignored and remained in 
uncertainty, there came a change— a modest one for an ordinary person, 
for me an enormous one: I was transferred to the sunny side of the prison 
on the fourth floor, where there were better rooms with better beds. Here 
the American warden, Colonel Andrus, paid a first visit to me: "Very 
pleased to see you." As camp commandant in Mondorf he had insisted on 
the utmost strictness, and I thought I could detect some mockery in his 
words. On the other hand, it was a pleasure to see the German staff again. 
The cooks, mess attendants, and barbers had been carefully picked from 
among prisoners of war. But because they too had known the meaning of 
imprisonment, they behaved helpfully toward us whenever there were no 
supervisory personnel about. They managed to whisper to us a good many 
bits of news from the papers, as well as good wishes and encouragements. 

If I opened the top pane of the high cell window the patch of sun- 
light that entered was just big enough for me to sunbathe the upper part 
of my body. Lying on blankets on the floor, I changed my position as the 
sun moved until its last slanting ray was gone. There was no light; there 
were no books or even newspapers. I was wholly cast on myself and had 
to fend off my growing depression without external aids. 

Sauckel was frequently led past my cell. Whenever he saw me, he 
made a face, gloomy but at the same time rather embarrassed. Finally 
my door too was unlocked. An American soldier awaited me, a note in 
hand on which were written my name and the room of the interrogating 
officer. We passed through courtyards and down staircases into the halls of 
the Nuremberg Palace of Justice. On the way I passed Funk obviously 
coming from an interrogation; he looked extremely worn and downcast. 
At our last meeting we had both been free men in Berlin. "This is how we 
meet again!" he called out in passing. From the impression he made upon 
me, tieless and in an impressed suit, with sallow, unhealthy complexion, 
I could only deduce that I must be making a similar wretched impression. 
For I had not seen myself in a mirror for weeks, and that was how it was 
going to be for years. I also saw Keitel standing in a room facing several 
American officers. He too looked shockingly run-down. 

A young American officer awaited me. He pleasantly invited me to 
sit down and then began asking for explanations of various matters. Ap- 
parently Sauckel had tried to make a better case for himself by branding 
me as solely responsible for the importation of foreign workers. The of- 
ficer proved to be well disposed and of his own accord composed an affi- 
davit which straightened out this matter. This somewhat eased my mind, 
for I had the feeling that since my departure from Mondorf a good deal 
had been said about me on the principle of "Incriminate the absent." 

Shortly afterward I was presented to the deputy prosecutor, Thomas 
Dodd. His questions were sharp and aggressive; we clashed frequently. 



509 ) Nuremberg 

I did not want to be cowed and answered candidly and without evasions, 
giving no thought to my future defense. I deliberately omitted many de- 
tails which might have sounded like extenuations. Back in my cell, I had 
the feeling: "Now you're in the trap." And in fact these statements later 
constituted an essential part of the charge against me. 

At the same time, however, the interrogation gave me a certain feeling 
of buoyancy. I believed and still believe that I acted rightly in offering 
no excuses and not sparing my own person. Anxiously, but with the resolu- 
tion to continue along the same path, I waited for the next interrogation, 
which had already been announced. I was not called again. Perhaps the 
prosecution had been impressed by my candor; I do not know the reason. 
All that followed were several politely formal question sessions with Soviet 
officers, who were accompanied by a heavily rouged stenographer. Seeing 
these men badly shook the stereotyped image I still held at that time. After 
every reply the officers would nod and say, "Tak, tak" which sounded 
odd but merely meant, as I soon found out, "So, so." Once the Soviet 
colonel asked me: "But surely you have read Hitler's Mein KampfF' Actu- 
ally, I had only leafed through it, partly because Hitler had told me the 
book was outmoded, partly because it was hard reading. When I said no, 
he roared with laughter. Somewhat insulted, I withdrew the reply and 
declared that I had read the book. After all, that was the only believable 
answer. But in the course of the trial this lie returned to haunt me. In 
cross-questioning the Soviet prosecution brought up this time I had con- 
tradicted myself. Then, under oath, I had to tell the truth and admit that 
at the interrogation I had spoken a falsehood. 

At the end of October all the defendants were assembled in the lower 
story. The whole wing of cells had been cleared of other prisoners. The 
silence was uncanny. Twenty-one persons were awaiting their trial.* 

Rudolf Hess, flown in from England, had also appeared, wearing a 
blue-gray coat, walking handcuffed between two American soldiers. Hess 
wore an absent-minded but at the same time obstinate expression. For 
years I had been accustomed to seeing all these defendants in magnificent 
uniforms, either unapproachable or jovially expansive. The whole scene 
now seemed unreal; sometimes I imagined I was dreaming. 

Nevertheless, we were already behaving like prisoners. Who, for ex- 
ample, in his days as a Reich Marshal or Field Marshal, as a Grand Ad- 
miral, minister, or Reichsleiter, would have thought that he would ever 
submit to intelligence testing by an American military psychologist? And 
yet this test was not only not resisted, everyone in fact strove to do the 
best he could on it and see his abilities confirmed. 

The surprise victor in this test, which embraced memory span, reac- 

* The twenty-second defendant, Bormann, was to be tried in absentia; Robert 
Ley had committed suicide before the trial began— Editor's note. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 510 

tion speeds, and imagination, was Schacht. He came out on top because 
the test allowed additional points with increasing age. Seyss-Inquart, 
though no one would have foreseen it, achieved the highest actual point 
score. Goering, too, was among the top scorers; I received a good median 
rating. 

A few days after we had been separated from the other prisoners, 
a commission consisting of several officers entered the deathly stillness 
of our cell block. They went from cell to cell. I heard them speaking a 
few words that I could not understand, until finally my door opened and 
a printed copy of the indictment was unceremoniously handed to me. The 
preliminary investigation had been concluded; the actual trial was begin- 
ning. In my naivete I had imagined that each of us would receive an 
individual indictment. Now it turned out that we were one and all accused 
of the monstrous crimes that this document listed. After reading it I was 
overwhelmed by a sense of despair. But in that despair at what had hap- 
pened and my role in it, I f ound the position I felt I should take in the 
trial: to regard my own fate as insignificant, not to struggle for my own 
life, but to assume the responsibility in a general sense. In spite of all the 
opposition of my lawyer and in spite of the strains of the trial, I held fast 
to this resolve. 

Under the impact of the indictment I wrote to my wife: 

I must regard my life as concluded. Only then can I shape its finale in 
the way I consider necessary. ... I must stand here as a minister of the 
Reich and not as a private individual. I have no right to consider all of you 
or myself. My sole wish is that I may be strong enough to stick to this posi- 
tion. Strange as it may sound, I am in good spirits when I have relinquished 
all hope and become uncertain and nervous as soon as I think I have a 
chance. . . . Perhaps, by my bearing, I can once more help the German 
people. Perhaps I shall accomplish it. There are not many here who will.* 

At this time the prison psychologist, G. M. Gilbert, was going from 
cell to cell with a copy of the indictment, asking the defendants to write 
their comments on it. When I read the partially evasive, partially dis- 
dainful words of many of my fellow defendants, I wrote, to Gilbert's as- 
tonishment: "The trial is necessary. There is a shared responsibility for 
such horrible crimes even in an authoritarian state." 

* Letter to my wife, October 17, 1945. Also, on this subject, I wrote to my wife 
on December 15, 1945: "I am duty-bound to face this tribunal. In view of the fate 
of the German people one may be too solicitous for one's own immediate family." 
In March 1946: "I cannot put up a cheap defense here. I believe you will under- 
stand, for in the end you and the children would feel shame if I forgot that many 
millions of Germans fell for a false ideal." Letter to my parents, April 25, 1946: "Don't 
solace yourselves with the idea that I am putting up a stiff fight for myself. One 
must bear one's responsibility here, not hope for favoring winds." 



5ii ) Nuremberg 

I still regard it as my greatest feat of psychic courage to have held to 
this view throughout the ten months of the trial. 

Along with the indictment we were presented with a long list of Ger- 
man lawyers, from whose ranks each of us could choose his defender if 
we had no proposals of our own. Much as I strained my memory, I could 
not recall a single lawyer. The names on the list were completely unknown 
to me, so I asked the court to make a choice. A few days later I was taken 
to the ground floor of the Palace of Justice. At one of the tables a slight 
man with strong glasses and a low voice stood up. "I am supposed to be 
your lawyer, if you agree. My name is Dr. Hans Flachsner, from Berlin." 
He had friendly eyes and an unassuming manner. When we discussed var- 
ious details of the indictment, he displayed a sensible, unhistrionic atti- 
tude. Finally he handed me a form. "Take this with you and consider 
whether you want me for your defense attorney. ,, I signed it there and 
then and did not regret it. In the course of the trial Flachsner proved to be 
a circumspect, tactful lawyer. But what mattered more to me, he felt a 
sympathy toward me out of which, during the ten months of the trial, a 
real mutual affection developed that has lasted to this day. 

Dining the preliminary investigation the prisoners were prevented 
from meeting. Now this regulation was relaxed, so that we crossed paths 
more often in the prison yard, where we could talk without surveillance. 
The trial, the indictment, the invalidity of the international tribunal, pro- 
found indignation at the disgrace— again and again as we walked our 
rounds of the yard I heard the same subjects and opinions. Among the 
twenty other defendants I found only one who shared my views. That was 
Fritzsche, with whom I could consider in detail the principle of respon- 
sibility. Later Seyss-Inquart also showed some understanding of this. With 
the others, all discussion was useless and wearing. We were speaking dif- 
ferent languages. 

On other questions also we naturally enough held divergent opinions. 
In what light we were going to describe Hitler s rule for purposes of this 
trial was acutely important. Goering, though he had had strong reserva- 
tions about some practices of the regime, was all in favor of whitewashing 
Hitler. Our only hope, he held, was to use this trial to promote a positive 
legend. I felt that it was unethical to deceive the German people in this 
way; I also thought it dangerous because it would make the transition to 
the future more difficult for the whole nation. Only the truth could ac- 
celerate the process of cutting free from the past. 

I had a certain insight into Goering's real motives when he observed 
that the victors would undoubtedly kill him but that within fifty years his 
remains would be laid in a marble sarcophagus and he would be cele- 
brated by the German people as a national hero and martyr. Many of the 
prisoners had the same dream about themselves. On other subjects Goer- 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 512 

ing's arguments were less effective. There were no differences among us, 
he said; we were all sentenced to death from the start and none of us 
had a chance. It was pointless to bother about a defense. I remarked: 
"Goering wants to ride into Valhalla with a large retinue." In actuality 
Goering later defended himself more stubbornly than the rest of us did. 

At Mondorf and Nuremberg, Goering had undergone a systematic 
withdrawal cure which had ended his drug addiction. Ever since, he was 
in better form than I had ever seen him. He displayed remarkable energy 
and became the most formidable personality among the defendants. I 
thought it a great pity that he had not been up to this level in the months 
before the outbreak of the war and in critical situations during the war. 
He would have been the only person whose authority and popularity Hit- 
ler would have had to reckon with. Actually, he had been one of the few 
sensible enough to foresee the doom that awaited us. But having thrown 
away his chance to save the country while that was still possible, it was 
absurd and truly criminal for him to use his regained powers to hoodwink 
his own people. His whole policy was one of deception. Once, in the 
prison yard something was said about Jewish survivors in Hungary. Goer- 
ing remarked coldly: "So, there are still some there? I thought we had 
knocked off all of them. Somebody slipped up again." I was stunned. 

My vow to accept responsibility for the entire regime could not be 
kept without some severe psychological crises. The only way of getting 
out of it was to escape trial by suicide. Once I tried using a towel to stop 
the circulation in my sick leg, in order to produce phlebitis. Remem- 
bering from one of our lectures in Kransberg that the nicotine from even 
a cigar, crumbled and dissolved in water, could be fatal, I kept a crushed 
cigar in my pocket for a long time. But from the intention to the deed 
is a very long way. 

The Sunday divine services became a great support for me. Even as 
recently as my stay in Kransberg I had refused to attend them. I did not 
want to seem soft. But in Nuremberg I threw aside such prideful feelings- 
The pressure of circumstances brought me— as, incidentally, it did almost 
all the defendants with the exception of Hess, Rosenberg, and Streicher— 
into our small chapel. 

Our suits had been put in mothballs; the Americans had provided 
us, during our imprisonment, with cotton gabardine fatigues dyed black. 
Now clothing-room clerks came to our cells. We were allowed to choose 
which of our clothes should be cleaned for the trial. Every detail was dis- 
cussed with the commandant, down to the matter of sleeve buttons. 

After a last inspection by Colonel Andrus, on November 19, 1945, we 
were led into the still empty courtroom, each of us escorted by a soldier, 
but without handcuffs. Seats were formally assigned. At the head were 
Goering, Hess, and Ribbentrop. I was placed third from last on the sec- 



513 ) Nuremberg 

ond bench, in agreeable company: Seyss-Inquart on my right, von Neu- 
rath on my left. Streicher and Funk sat right in front of me. 

I was glad that the trial was beginning, and almost all of the defend- 
ants expressed the same view: If only it were all over at lastl 

The trial began with the grand, devastating opening address by the 
chief American prosecutor, Justice Robert H. Jackson. But I took comfort 
from one sentence in it which accused the defendants of guilt for the 
regime's crimes, but not the German people. This thesis corresponded 
precisely with what I had hoped would be a subsidiary result of the trial: 
that the hatred directed against the German people which had been 
fanned by the propaganda of the war years and had reached an extreme 
after the revelation of those crimes, would now be focused upon us, the 
defendants. My theory was that the top leadership in a modern war could 
be expected to face the consequences at the end precisely because they 
had previously not been exposed to any danger.* In a letter to my defense 
attorney who was trying to define the line we would follow, I declared 
that viewed within the total framework everything that we would be 
discussing as points in my favor appeared to me unimportant and ludi- 
crous. 

For many months the documents and testimonies accumulated. These 
aimed to prove that the crimes had been committed, without regard to 
whether any one of the defendants had been personally connected with 
them. It was horrible, and could only be borne because our nerves became 
more blunted from session to session. To this day photographs, documents, 
and orders keep coming back to me. They were so monstrous that they 
seemed unbelievable, and yet none of the defendants doubted their gen- 
uineness. 

Along with this, the daily routine continued: from morning to twelve 
noon the trial sessions; recess for eating in the upper rooms of the Palace 
of Justice; from two until five o'clock second session; then return to my 
cell where I changed clothes quickly, gave my suit out for pressing, had 
supper, and then usually was taken to the conference room for the defense 
where I discussed the course of the trial with my lawyer until nearly ten 
o'clock and made notes for the coming defense. Finally, I returned ex- 
hausted to my cell late in the evening and immediately fell asleep. On 
Saturdays and Sundays the court did not hold sessions, but we worked all 

* Letter to my wife, December 15, 1945: "If I had not had my assignment, I 
would have been a soldier, and what then? Five years of war are a long time, and 
I would almost certainly have had more to endure and would perhaps have suffered 
a worse fate. I am glad to accept my situation if by so doing I can still do some- 
thing for the German people." Letter of August 7, 1946: "In such situations one 
should not think only of one's own life. Every soldier on the battlefield is faced with 
danger of death and has no choice in the matter." 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 514 

the longer with our lawyers. Generally there remained little more than 
half an hour daily for a walk in the prison yard. 

In spite of our common situation no sense of solidarity arose among 
us, the defendants. We split up into groups. A significant instance was 
the establishment of a "generals' garden'— a small section, no larger than 
twenty by twenty feet separated from the rest of the prison garden by 
low hedges. Here our military men trudged steadily around in self-elected 
isolation, although the small walking area must have been very uncom- 
fortable. We who were civilians respected this division. For the noon 
meals the prison command had put a number of separate rooms at our 
disposal. My table mates were Fritzsche, Funk, and Schirach.* 

In the meantime we had regained some hope that we would come out 
of the trial with our lives, since the general indictment had been followed 
by a detailed indictment for each defendant. Clear distinctions were made 
in these. Consequently, Fritzsche and I at this point were counting on 
milder judgments, for the charges against us were comparatively less 
harsh. 

In the courtroom, however, we encountered only hostile faces, icy 
dogmas. The only exception was the interpreters' booth. From there I 
might expect a friendly nod. Among the British and American prosecutors 
there were also some who occasionally manifested a trace of sympathy. 
I was taken aback when the journalists began laying bets on the extent of 
our penalties, and their list of those slated for hanging sometimes included 
us too. 

After a pause of several days devoted to the final preparations of the 
defense, the * counterattack" began. A few of us expected a great deal of 
it. Before Goering mounted the witness stand, he had promised Funk, 
Sauckel, and others to take their responsibility upon himself and thus ex- 
onerate them. In his early statements, which had a considerable ring of 
courage, he kept this promise. But the closer he approached to details, 
the more disappointed grew the faces of those who were counting on him, 
for he then pared down his own responsibility point by point. 

In his duel with Goering, Prosecutor Jackson had the advantage of 
surprise. There were always fresh documents he could pull out of his 
swollen briefcase. But Goering could take advantage of his adversary's 
basic ignorance of the material. In the end Goering merely fought for his 
life, using evasions, obfuscations, and denials. 

Ribbentrop and Keitel, the next two defendants, behaved in the same 

* The prison psychologist, G. M. Gilbert, has revealed in his Nuremberg Diary 
(New York: Farrar, Straus & Young, Inc., 1947), p. 158, that the different groups 
were established deliberately by the prison command to prevent Goering from "ter- 
rorizing the defendants."— Translators' note. 



515 ) Nuremberg 

way. They too repudiated any responsibility: Whenever confronted with 
a document that bore their signatures, they justified it on grounds of an 
order from Hitler. Disgusted, I blurted out the remark about the "letter 
carriers on high salaries," which afterward was printed in newspapers 
throughout the world. When I consider the matter today, they were basi- 
cally telling the truth: They were actually not much more than trans- 
mitters of Hitler's orders. Rosenberg, on the other hand, made an impres- 
sion of honesty and consistency. All the efforts of his lawyer both before 
and behind the scenes to persuade him to recant his so-called ideology 
came to nothing. Hans Frank, Hitler's lawyer and later Governor General 
of Poland, also shouldered his responsibility. Funk reasoned skillfully and 
in a way that stirred my pity. Schacht's attorney drew on all his rhetorical 
resources to make his client out a rebel conspirator; his efforts ended only 
in his weakening rather than strengthening the actual exonerating evi- 
dence in Schacht's favor. Doenitz, for his part, fought obstinately for 
himself and his submarines; it gave him great satisfaction when his law- 
yer was able to present an affidavit from Admiral Nimitz, commander of 
the American Pacific fleet, stating that he had conducted his own sub- 
marine warfare on the basis of the same principles as the German naval 
leadership. Raeder gave the impression of objectivity; Sauckel's simple- 
mindedness seemed rather pathetic; Jodl's precise and sober defense was 
rather imposing. He seemed to be one of the few men who stood above the 
situation. 

The order of testimony followed the seating order. My nervousness 
increased, for now Seyss-Inquart, my neighbor, was already in the witness 
chair. A lawyer himself, he had no illusions about his situation; he had 
been a direct participant in deportations and the shooting of hostages. 
He seemed controlled and concluded his testimony with a statement that 
he must take responsibility for what had happened. By a lucky chance, 
a few days after the testimony which sealed his death sentence he received 
the first good news about his son, who up to this time had been missing 
in Russia. 

When I went to the witness stand, I had stage fright. I hastily swal- 
lowed a tranquilizing pill the German doctor had prudently handed to 
me. Opposite me, about ten paces away, Flachsner stood at the defense 
attorney's desk; on my left, at a higher level, sat the judges. 

Flachsner opened his thick manuscript. Questions and answers began. 
At the outset I stated: "If Hitler had had any friends, I would certainly 
have been one of his close friends"— by which I was trying to explain 
something that up to this point not even the prosecution had asserted. 
A vast number of details referring to the documents presented were dis- 
cussed. I corrected misunderstandings but tried not to sound apologetic 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 516 

or evasive.* In a few sentences I assumed responsibility for all the orders 
from Hitler which I had carried out. I took the position that in every 
government orders must remain orders for the subordinate organs of the 
government; but that the leadership on all levels must examine and weigh 
the orders it receives and is consequently co-responsible for them, even if 
the orders have been carried out under duress. 

What mattered more to me was to assert my collective responsibility 
for all the measures of Hitler, not excluding the crimes, which were under- 
taken or committed in the period from 1942 on wherever and by whom- 
ever. "In political life there is a responsibility for a mans own sector," 
I said to the court. 

For that he is of course fully responsible. But beyond that there is a 
collective responsibility when he has been one of the leaders. Who else is to 
be held responsible for the course of events, if not the closest associates 
around the Chief of State? But this collective responsibility can only apply 
to fundamental matters and not to details. . . . Even in an authoritarian sys- 
tem this collective responsibility of the leaders must exist; there can be no 
attempting to withdraw from the collective responsibility after the catas- 
trophe. For if the war had been won, the leadership would probably have 
raised the claim that it was collectively responsible. ... I have this obligation 
all the more since the chief of government has withdrawn from his respon- 
sibility to the German people and to the world. 2 

To Seyss-Inquart, I expressed these ideas in more vivid fashion: 

How would it be if the scene suddenly changed, and we all acted as if 
the war had been won? Can't you just see how each of us would rush to 
put his merits and his achievements in the forefront? Now the thing has 
been switched; instead of decorations, honors, and gifts, death sentences 
are being dispersed. 

During the past several weeks Flachsner had tried in vain to reason 
me out of accepting responsibility for things that had happened outside 
my Ministry. To do so, he said, could have fatal consequences. But after 

* In court I clearly acknowledged my share of the responsibility for the forced- 
labor program: "I was grateful to Sauckel for every worker he provided me with. 
Often when we failed to meet armaments quotas because of a shortage of workers, I 
would put the blame on Sauckel. ... Of course I knew that foreign laborers were 
working in the armaments plants. I assented to this. ... I have made it clear enough 
that I approved of Sauckel's labor policy [of bringing forced labor] from the occupied 
areas to Germany. . . . The laborers were for the most part brought to Germany against 
their will, and I raised no protest against this policy. On the contrary, at the begin- 
ning, until the autumn of 1942, I tried to have as many workers as possible brought 
to Germany/' 



517 ) Nuremberg 

my admission I felt my spirits lightened. I was glad I had not tried to 
dodge the issue. Having made this matter clear, I believed I could now 
launch into the second part of my testimony which dealt with the last 
phase of the war. I believed it important to present these data, chiefly for 
their effect on the German people. If they learned of Hitler's intentions to 
destroy the very basis of life for the German people after the loss of the 
war, it would help the nation turn its back on the past.* Here was strong 
evidence to counter the creation of a Hitler legend. But when I said 
these things, I encountered stiff disapproval from Goering and other de- 
fendants. 3 

In court I intended merely to mention my plan to assassinate Hitler, 
chiefly in order to show how dangerous Hitler's destructive intentions had 
seemed to me. "I prefer not to go into the details," I said. The judges put 
their heads together. The presiding judge then turned to me: "The court 
would like to hear the details. We will hold our recess now." I did not 
want to make any further statements on the matter, for fear of seeming to 
boast about it. I sketched the story with considerable reluctance and 
agreed with my defense attorney that he was not to use this part of my 
testimony in his final plea. 4 

Back in the safe track of our interrogation manuscript, the concluding 
part of my testimony ran rapidly through the last period of the war with- 
out interruption. In order to diminish any impression of special merits, I 
deliberately qualified my remarks: "All these measures were not even so 
dangerous. From January 1945 on, it was possible inside Germany to 
carry out any reasonable measure contrary to the official policy. Every 
sensible person welcomed such measures. Everyone involved knew what 
our [counter-] orders meant. Even longstanding party members came to 
the nation's aid in that period. Jointly we were able to do a great deal to 
undercut Hitler's insane orders." 

Flachsner closed his manuscript with visible relief and went to his 
seat among the other lawyers. Justice Jackson, the chief U.S. prosecutor, 
took his place. For me that was no surprise, for the previous evening an 
American officer had come rushing to my cell to tell me that Jackson had 
decided to cross-examine me himself. In contrast to his usual manner, Jack- 
son began quietly, in an almost benevolent voice. After he had again 
ascertained by documents and questions that I admitted co-responsibility 
for the employment of millions of forced laborers, he discussed the second 
part of my testimony in a favorable light. I had, he said, been the only 
man who had had the courage to tell Hitler to his face that the war was 

Letter to my wife, June 1946: "What matters most to me is that I manage to 
tell the truth about the end. That is what the German people must be told." Letter, 
mid- August: "The best way I can help my people is to speak the truth about the 
whole madness. There are no benefits for me in this course, nor do I want any bene- 
fits/' 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 518 

lost. I interposed, saying that Guderian, Jodl, and many of the com- 
manders of army groups had also defied Hitler. When he asked the 
further question, "Then there were more plots than you have told us?" 
I replied rather evasively: "In that period it was remarkably easy to 
concoct a plot. You could accost almost anyone on the street. If you 
told him what the situation was, he would answer: It's sheer madness/ 
And if he had the courage, he would offer his aid. ... It was not so 
dangerous as it looks from here, for there were perhaps a few dozen 
irrational people; the other eighty million were extremely rational as 
soon as they realized what was involved/' 5 

After a further cross-examination by General Raginsky, the repre- 
sentative of the Soviet prosecution— an examination full of misunder- 
standings because of errors by the interpreters— Flachsner once more 
stepped forward. He handed the court a sheaf of written statements by 
my twelve witnesses. With that, the presentation of my case was over. 
For hours I had been gripped by severe stomach pains. Back in my cell, 
I threw myself on my cot, overwhelmed equally by physical pain and 
mental exhaustion. 



35 

Conclusions 



For the last time the prosecutors took the floor, their summations 
concluded the trial. For us only our final speeches remained. Since these 
were to be broadcast in full over the radio, they had a special significance. 
They were our last chance to address our own people, but also our last 
chance, by admitting our guilt, by facing squarely the crimes of the past, 
to show the nation that we had led astray a way out of its quandary. 1 

The nine months of trial had left their marks on us. Even Goering, 
who had entered the trial with an aggressive determination to justify 
himself, spoke in his final speech of the terrible crimes that had been 
brought to light, condemned the ghastly mass murders, and declared 
that he could not comprehend them. Keitel stated that he would rather 
choose death than be entangled again in such horrors. Frank spoke of 
the guilt that Hitler and the German people had laden upon themselves. 
He warned the incorrigibles against the "way of political folly which 
must lead to destruction and death." His speech sounded overwrought, 
but it expressed the essence of my own view also. Even Streicher in his 
final speech condemned Hitlers "mass killings of Jews." Funk spoke of 
frightful crimes that filled him with profound shame. Schacht declared 
that he stood "shaken to the depths of his soul by the unspeakable misery 
which he had tried to prevent." Sauckel was "shocked in his inmost soul 
by the crimes that had been revealed in the course of the trial." Papen 
declared that "the power of evil had proved stronger than that of good." 

(519) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 520 

Seyss-Inquart spoke of "fearful excesses." To Fritzsche "the murder of 
five million people" was "a gruesome warning for the future." On the 
other hand they all denied their own share in these events. 

In a sense my hopes had been realized. The judicial guilt had been 
concentrated to a large extent upon us, the defendants. But during that 
accursed era, a factor in addition to human depravity had entered history, 
the factor that distinguished our tyranny from all historical precedents, 
and a factor that would inevitably increase in importance in the future. 
As the top representative of a technocracy which had without compunc- 
tion used all its know-how in an assault on humanity,* I tried not only 
to confess but also to understand what had happened. In my final speech 
I said: 

Hitler's dictatorship was the first dictatorship of an industrial state in 
this age of modern technology, a dictatorship which employed to perfection 
the instruments of technology to dominate its own people. ... By means of 
such instruments of technology as the radio and public-address systems, 
eighty million persons could be made subject to the will of one individual. 
Telephone, teletype, and radio made it possible to transmit the commands 
of the highest levels directly to the lowest organs where because of their 
high authority they were executed uncritically. Thus many offices and squads 
received their evil commands in this direct manner. The instruments of tech- 
nology made it possible to maintain a close watch over all citizens and to 
keep criminal operations shrouded in a high degree of secrecy. To the out- 
sider this state apparatus may look like the seemingly wild tangle of cables 
in a telephone exchange; but like such an exchange it could be directed by 
a single will. Dictatorships of the past needed assistants of high quality 
in the lower ranks of the leadership also— men who could think and act in- 

* The readiness of technicians to carry out any order is, of course, not limited 
to our country. A year later, Harry L. Stimson (U. S. Secretary of State from 1929- 
33, Secretary of War from 1911-13 and 1940-45) wrote an article, "The Niirnberg 
Trial: Landmark in Law," Foreign Affairs (1947) in which he said: 

We must never forget, that under modern conditions of life, science, and 
technology, all war has become greatly brutalized, and that no one who joins in 
it, even in self-defense, can escape becoming also in a measure brutalized. Modern 
war cannot be limited in its destructive method and the inevitable debasement of 
all participants. ... A fair scrutiny of the last two World Wars makes clear the 
steady intensification in the inhumanity of the weapons and methods employed 
by both, the aggressors and the victors. In order to defeat Japanese aggression, 
we were forced, as Admiral Nimitz has stated, to employ a technique of unre- 
stricted submarine warfare, not unlike that which 25 years ago was the proximate 
cause of our entry into World War I. In the use of strategic air power the Allies 
took the lives of hundreds of thousands of civilians in Germany and in Japan. . . . 
We as well as our enemies have contributed to the proof that the central moral 
problem is war and not its methods, and that a continuance of war will in all 
probability end with the destruction of our civilization. 



521 ) Conclusions 

dependently. The authoritarian system in the age of technology can do with- 
out such men. The means of communication alone enable it to mechanize 
the work of the lower leadership. Thus the type of uncritical receiver of 
orders is created. 

The criminal events of those years were not only an outgrowth of 
Hitler s personality. The extent of the crimes was also due to the fact 
that Hitler was the first to be able to employ the implements of tech- 
nology to multiply crime. 

I thought of the consequences that unrestricted rule together with 
the power of technology— making use of it but also driven by it— might 
have in the future. This war, I continued, had ended with remote- 
controlled rockets, aircraft flying at the speed of sound, atom bombs, 
and a prospect of chemical warfare. In five to ten years it would be 
possible for an atomic rocket, perhaps serviced by ten men, to annihilate 
a million human beings in the center of New York within seconds. It 
would be possible to spread plagues and destroy harvests. "The more 
technological the world becomes, the greater is the danger. ... As the 
former minister in charge of a highly developed armaments economy it 
is my last duty to state: A new great war will end with the destruction 
of human culture and civilization. There is nothing to stop unleashed 
technology and science from completing its work of destroying man 
which it has so terribly begun in this war. . . . 2 

"The nightmare shared by many people," I said, "that some day 
the nations of the world may be dominated by technology— that nightmare 
was very nearly made a reality under Hitler's authoritarian system. 
Every country in the world today faces the danger of being terrorized 
by technology; but in a modern dictatorship this seems to me to be 
unavoidable. Therefore, the more technological the world becomes, the 
more essential will be the demand for individual freedom and the self- 
awareness of the individual human being as a counterpoise to technology. 
. . . Consequently this trial must contribute to laying down the ground 
rules for life in human society. What does my own fate signify, after 
all that has happened and in comparison with so important a goal?" 

After the course the trial had run, my situation was, as I saw it, 
desperate. My last sentence was by no means intended as a theoretical 
profession of faith. I considered my life at its close. 3 

The court recessed for an indefinite period to consider the verdicts. 
We waited four long weeks. During this time of almost unbearable 
suspense, exhausted by the preceding eight months of mental torment, 
I read Dickens's novel of the French Revolution, A Tale of Two Cities. 
He describes how the prisoners in the Bastille looked forward with 
tranquillity and often with cheerful serenity toward their fate. But I was 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 522 

incapable of such inner freedom. The Soviet prosecution had urged the 
death sentence for me. 

On September 30, 1946, in freshly pressed suits, we took our seats 
in the dock for the last time. The court wanted to spare us the movie 
cameras and photographers at this juncture. The spotlights which earlier 
had illuminated the large courtroom to allow the recording of each of 
our emotions were extinguished. The room assumed an unusually gloomy 
aspect as the judges entered and defendants, lawyers, prosecutors, 
spectators, and press representatives rose in their honor for the last 
time. As on every day of the trial, the presiding judge, Lord Lawrence, 
bowed to all sides, to us, the defendants, as well. Then he sat down. 

The judges took turns. For several hours they monotonously read 
out the most dreadful chapter in German history. Still, the condemnation 
of the leadership seemed to me to exonerate the German people from 
judicial guilt. For if Baldur von Schirach, for many years leader of the 
German youth and one of Hitlers closest associates, and if Hjalmar 
Schacht, Hitler s Minister of Economics at the beginning of the rearma- 
ment, were acquitted of having prepared and carried out aggressive 
warfare— then how could any ordinary soldier, let alone women and 
children, be burdened with the guilt? If Grand Admiral Raeder and 
Hitler s deputy, Rudolf Hess, were acquitted of having participated in 
the crimes against humanity— how could a German engineer or worker 
be held answerable? 

I also hoped that the trial would exert a direct influence upon the 
occupation policies of the victorious powers. They for their part could 
not very well mete out to our people the treatment they themselves had 
just defined as criminal. In this, I had mainly in mind the main charge 
against me: forced labor. 4 

There followed the justification of the verdict for each individual 
case, but as yet without announcement of the verdict itself. 5 My own 
activities were described in a cool and unbiased fashion, in total accord 
with what I myself had already declared during my interrogation. My 
responsibility for the deportation of foreign workers was stated; then 
that I had opposed Himmler s plans solely on the tactical grounds of their 
effect on production but had used his concentration camp inmates with- 
out protest and had requisitioned Soviet prisoners of war for work in 
the armaments industry. It added to my culpability that I had raised 
no humane and ethical considerations in these cases, thus helping to 
forge the policy of raising foreign laborers by force. 

None of the defendants, including those who could certainly count 
on the death sentence, lost his composure as the judges read out these 
charges. In silence, without any outward sign of emotion, they listened. 
It still remains incredible to me that I was able to stick it out through the 
trial without breaking down and that I was able to listen to the reading 



523 ) Conclusions 

of the judgment with anxiety, but still with a measure of strength and 
self-control. Flachsner was overoptimistic: "The judgment means you'll 
receive perhaps four or five years." 

The next day we, the defendants, saw each other for the last time 
before the announcement of the individual sentences. We met in the 
basement of the Palace of Justice. One after the other we entered a small 
elevator and did not return. In the courtroom above the sentence was 
announced. Finally it was my turn. Accompanied by an American soldier, 
I rode up in the elevator. A door opened, and I stood alone on a small 
platform in the courtroom, facing the judges. Earphones were handed to 
me. In my ears the words reverberated: "Albert Speer, to twenty years 
imprisonment." 

A few days later I accepted the sentence. I waived the right to an 
appeal to the Four Powers. Any penalty weighed little compared to 
the misery we had brought upon the world. "For there are things," I 
noted in my diary a few weeks later, "for which one is guilty even 
if one might offer excuses— simply because the scale of the crimes 
is so overwhelming that by comparison any human excuse pales to 
insignificance." 

Today, a quarter of a century after these events, it is not only 
specific faults that burden my conscience, great as these may have been. 
My moral failure is not a matter of this item and that; it resides in my 
active association with the whole course of events. I had participated 
in a war which, as we of the intimate circle should never have doubted, 
was aimed at world dominion. What is more, by my abilities and my 
energies I had prolonged that war by many months. I had assented to 
having the globe of the world crown that domed hall which was to be 
the symbol of new Berlin. Nor was it only symbolically that Hitler 
dreamed of possessing the globe. It was part of his dream to subjugate 
the other nations. France, I had heard him say many times, was to be 
reduced to the status of a small nation. Belgium, Holland, even Burgundy, 
were to be incorporated into his Reich. The national life of the Poles 
and the Soviet Russians was to be extinguished; they were to be made 
into helot peoples. Nor, for one who wanted to listen, had Hitler ever 
concealed his intention to exterminate the Jewish people. In his speech 
of January 30, 1939, 6 he openly stated as much. Although I never actually 
agreed with Hitler on these questions, I had nevertheless designed the 
buildings and produced the weapons which served his ends. 

During the next twenty years of my life I was guarded, in Spandau 
prison, by nationals of the four powers against whom I had organized 
Hitlers war. Along with my six fellow prisoners, they were the only 
people I had close contact with. Through them I learned directly what 
the effects of my work had been. Many of them mourned loved ones who 
had died in the war— in particular, every one of the Soviet guards had 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 524 

lost some close relative, brothers or a father. Yet not one of them bore 
a grudge toward me for my personal share in the tragedy; never did I 
hear words of recrimination. At the lowest ebb of my existence, in con- 
tact with these ordinary people, I encountered uncorrupted feelings 
of sympathy, helpfulness, human understanding, feelings that bypassed 
the prison rules. . . . On the day before my appointment as Minister of 
Armaments and War Production I had encountered peasants in the 
Ukraine who had saved me from frostbite. At the time I had been 
merely touched, without understanding. Now, after all was over, I once 
again was treated to examples of human kindness that transcended all 
enmity. And now, at last, I wanted to understand. This book, too, is an 
attempt at such understanding. 

"The catastrophe of this war," I wrote in my cell in 1947, "has 
proved the sensitivity of the system of modern civilization evolved in 
the course of centuries. Now we know that we do not live in an earth- 
quake-proof structure. The build-up of negative impulses, each reinforcing 
the other, can inexorably shake to pieces the complicated apparatus of 
the modern world. There is no halting this process by will alone. The 
danger is that the automatism of progress will depersonalize man further 
and withdraw more and more of his self -responsibility." 

Dazzled by the possibilities of technology, I devoted crucial years of 
my life to serving it. But in the end my feelings about it are highly 
skeptical. 



Afterword 



In writing this book my intention has been not only to describe the 
past, but to issue warnings for the future. During the first months of 
my imprisonment, while I was still in Nuremberg, I wrote a great deal, 
out of the need to relieve some of the burden that pressed so heavily 
upon me. That was also the motivation for further studies and notes 
undertaken during 1946 and 1947. Finally, in March 1953 I decided to 
set down my memoirs in coherent form. Was it a disadvantage or an 
advantage that they were written under conditions of depressing solitude? 
At the time I was often startled by the ruthlessness with which I judged 
others and myself. On December 26, 1954, I finished the first draft. 

When I was released from Spandau prison on October 1, 1966, con- 
sequently, I found more than two thousand pages of my own writing at 
my disposal. Then, with the aid of the documents of my Ministry pre- 
served in the Federal Archives in Koblenz, I reworked this material into 
the present autobiography. 

I am indebted to the editors who discussed many problems with me 
over two years, Wolf Jobst Siedler, head of the Ullstein and Propylaen 
publishing houses, and Joachim C. Fest, member of the advisory board 
of these publishers. Their keen questions helped me frame many of the 
general observations in this book, as well as my treatment of the psycho- 
logical and atmospheric aspects of events. My fundamental view of 
Hitler, his system, and my own part in it, as I had set it down fourteen 

(525) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 526 

years earlier in the first version of my memoirs, was confirmed and 
reinforced by our conversations. 

I am also indebted to Dr. Alfred Wagner, UNESCO, Paris, to 
Archivist Dr. Thomas Trumpp and Frau Hedwig Singer of the Federal 
Archives, Koblenz, and to David Irving for permitting me to use several 
previously unpublished diary entries of Jodl and Goebbels. 



Notes 



Unless otherwise indicated and with the exception of family letters, all 
documents, letters, speeches, and such, as well as the Office Journal, are in the 
Federal Archives (Bundesarchiv) in Koblenz, catalogued under the inventory 
number R 3 (Reich Ministry of Armaments and War Production). 

The Office Journal is a day-by-day record kept in my department from 
1941 to 1944. It covered my activities first as Inspector General of Buildings 
and later as Armaments Minister. [References in text to "the Minister" indicate 
author.— Translators* Note] 

The Fuhrerprotokoll is the record of Hitler's activities. 



chapter 1: Origins and Youth 

1. For six hundred consecutive years, starting in 1192, Reich Marshals from 
the von Pappenheim family became Quartermasters General of the German 
Army. In addition they were Chief Army Provosts and responsible for mili- 
tary roads, transportation, and health. (K. Bosl, Die Reichsministerialitat 
[Darmstadt, 1967]). 

2. These remarks on music and literature as well as those on the occupation 
of the Ruhr and the inflation are taken from letters I wrote at the time to my 
future wife. 

3. The concluding lines from Heinrich Tessenow, Handwerk und Kleinstadt 
(1920). 



( 5*7 ) 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 528 

chapter 2: Profession and Vocation 

1. This quotation and the one following are cited from the unpublished tran- 
script of notes taken by Wolfgang Jungermann, a student of Tessenow, on 
his lectures from 1929 to 1932. 

2. Quoted from memory. 



chapter 3: Junction 
1. See Die neue Reichskanzlei (Munich: Zentralverlag der NSDAP, no year). 

chapter 5: Architectural Megalomania 

1. Writing in 1787, Goethe suggested in Iphigenie on Taurus that even "the 
best man" finally "becomes accustomed to cruelty" and "in the end makes 
a law of that which he despises"; habit makes him "hard and almost un- 
knowable." 

2. To this end we planned to avoid, as far as possible, all such elements of 
modern construction as steel girders and reinforced concrete, which are 
subject to weathering. Despite their height, the walls were intended io 
withstand the impact of the wind even if the roofs and ceilings were so 
neglected that they no longer braced the walls. The static factors were 
calculated with this in mind. 

3. Sir Neville Henderson, Failure of a Mission (New York, 1940), p. 72. 

4. Both pictures were painted (from photographs) by Hitler's official painter, 
Professor Knirr, whom Hitler always rewarded handsomely for his work. 
A photograph from a later period shows that Knirr was also commissioned 
to do a portrait of Hitler's father. 

5. According to Rolf Wagenfuhr, Die deutsche Industrie im Kriege 1939-1945 
(Berlin, 1954), p. 86, German expenditures for war production in 1944 
amounted to seventy-one billion marks. Die deutsche Bauzeitung, Vol. 1898, 
Nos. 5, 9, 26, and 45, contain details about the future site for German 
national celebrations. 

6. The Olympic Stadium built in Berlin in 1936 had a volume of only 9,886,800 
cubic feet. 

7. From an unpublished speech delivered by Hitler on January 9, 1939 to the 
workers constructing the new Chancellery building. 



chapter 6: The Greatest Assignment 

1. See Reichsgesetzblatt, January 30, 1937, p. 103. 

2. In this way the necessary switches and sidings and the repair shops could 



529 ) Notes 

be located far outside of Berlin and would no longer interfere with the 
future architectural development of the city. 

The site covered an area of about 8150 acres. Given the present-day stand- 
ard density of 48 inhabitants per acre, that would yield 400,000 inhabitants. 
As long ago as 1910, the city plan by Professors Brix and Genzmer which 
won first prize in a contest on Berlin was based on the projection that Berlin 
would have ten million inhabitants by the year 2000 (Die deutsche Bauzei- 
tung, No. 42 [1910]). 

John Burchardt (Dean of Massachusetts Institute of Technology) and Bush- 
Brown have observed in The Architecture of America (1961), a volume 
published for the centennial of the American Institute of Architects, that 
there was little difference between Fascist, Communist, and democratic 
taste at least insofar as it was expressed through official channels. As ex- 
amples of the neoclassic style in Washington, D.C., Burchardt mentions the 
Federal Reserve Building (designed by Crete, 1937), the Roman rotunda of 
the Jefferson Memorial (Pope, 1937), the National Gallery (Pope, 1939), 
the Supreme Court, and the National Archives. 



chapter 7: Obersalzberg 

1. Built in neo-Gothic style between 1862 and 1924. The tower was restricted 
to a height three feet less than that of St. Stephan's Cathedral. 



chapter 8: The New Chancellery 

1. In the Berlin Sportpalast on January 9, 1939, Hitler delivered an address 
to mark the completion of the new Chancellery. In this unpublished speech 
he once more referred to the speed with which the Chancellery had been 
built. As early as 1935, Hitler had commissioned me to work out a design 
for a sizable enlargement of the Chancellery. 

2. Dr. Grawitz, an SS Major General (Gruppenfuhrer) and chief of the SS 
medical corps, had given him this advice. 

3. Ultraseptyl. 

4. Ilya Mechnikov studied bacteria, toxins, and immunity; he was awarded 
the Nobel Prize in 1908. 

5. From the unpublished speech delivered in Berlin's "German Hall" on 
August 2, 1938, to celebrate the raising of the ridgepole for the new Chan- 
cellery. 

6. From Hitler's speech on January 9, 1939. 

7. See Friedrich Hossbach, Zwischen Wehrmacht und Hitler 1934-1938 
(Gottingen, 1949), P- 207. 

8. Today the Theodor-Heuss Platz. 

9. From my memorandum to Hitler, September 20, 1944. 
10. See Die Reichskanzlei (Munich: Eher-Verlag), p. 6of. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 53O 

chapter 9: A Day in the Chancellery 

l. Every day Hitler did have innumerable meetings with Gauleiters, acquaint- 
ances and old party members who had achieved rank and prestige. But so 
far as I could observe, these discussions did not take care of any work. 
Hitler merely rambled on in the style of his table talk, touching informally 
on various problems which were occupying him. The conversation usually 
turned fairly quickly to unimportant matters. Hitler's appointment calendar 
undoubtedly would have given a very different impression of his capacity 
for work. 

chapter 10: Our Empire Style 

1. These buildings are mentioned in the Office Journal, 1941. 

2. The Tourism Building at the intersection of the grand avenue and Pots- 
damer Strasse. 

3. Office Journal, 1941: "The Opera House stands opposite the Economics 
Ministry, the Philharmonic faces the Colonial Ministry." Around 1941 the 
architect Klaj reported to me that in the architecture section of the army 
High Command model houses suitable for Africa were being designed. 

4. See also Goebbels's diary entry, May 12, 1943: "Either Frederick the Great 
should be provided with a magnificent mausoleum in the classic style, to 
be erected in the park at Sanssouci, or he should be interred in the great 
Soldiers' Hall of the projected ministry of war building." 

5. The Berlin triumphal arch (including the arch aperture) would have had 
a volume of 83,543,460 cubic feet; the Arc de Triomphe in Paris would 
have fitted into it 49 times. The Soldiers' Hall was a cube 820 feet long, 
295 feet deep, and 262 feet high. The field behind the hall, intended for 
the new High Command, measured 984 by 1476 feet. The entrance hall 
with the grand staircase in Goering's new building had a floor space of 
158 by 158 feet and a height of 138 feet. The cost of this building was 
estimated at a minimum of 160 million Reichsmarks. The new Berlin Town 
Hall was planned to have a length of 1476 feet; its central structure would 
have been 197 feet high. The Navy High Command was to be 1050 feet 
long, and the new police headquarters 919 feet. 

6. Field Marshal von Blomberg, until 1938 Minister of War, was married in 
January 1938. Hitler and Goering attended the wedding. Shortly after- 
ward it was revealed that the Field Marshal's bride had been a prostitute, 
whereupon Hitler forced him to resign— thus strengthening Nazi party 
control over the army. There is considerable evidence that von Blomberg 
was the victim of an elaborate plot by Goering, Himmler, and possibly 
Hitler. See the detailed account of this episode in Hans Bernd Gisevius, 
To the Bitter End (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1947). 

7. Hitler's speech at the raising of the ridgepole for the new Chancellery, 
August 2, 1938. 

8. Albert Speer, "Neuplanung der Reichshauptstadt," in Der Baumeister 
(Munich, 1939), No. 1. Our building plans also became the target of the 



53i ) Notes 

typical Berlin wit, even though so little was known of what we really had 
in mind. Ulrich von Hassell notes in his diary that Furtwangler was sup- 
posed to have said to me: "It must be wonderful to be able to build on 
such a grand scale using your own ideas." To which I am supposed to 
have replied: "Imagine if someone told you: It is my unshakable will that 
the Ninth is to be performed from now on only on the harmonica/ " 
9. Office Journal, March 28, 1941. 

10. Office Journal, April 29, 1941. 

11. Office Journal, March 31, 1941. 



chapter 11: The Globe 

1. According to the preserved plan, the new assembly hall was to have an 
area of 22,596 square feet. 

2. Working sketches for the project, drawn up at the time, are still in exis- 
tence. On November 5, 1936, Hitler did the sketches based on the pre- 
liminary plans I had presented. 

3. These ninety-eight-foot columns were made up of red granite sections 
about ten feet in diameter which were already being quarried in Sweden 
when the war broke out. 

4. The 741,510,000 cubic feet was made up as follows: 331,914,000 cubic 
feet for the rotunda with its dome, 335,445,000 cubic feet for the square 
pedestal, 77,682,000 cubic feet for the four antechambers, and 282,480 
for the turret. 

5. According to K. Lankheit, Der Tempel der Vernunft (Basel, 1968), the 
dome of the building designed by Etienne L. Boultee to glorify Raison as 
the French Revolution interpreted it would have measured 853 feet in 
diameter. 

6. In order to compensate for variations in the subsoil and to compact the 
foundation by its own dead weight, the construction engineers insisted 
on a solid slab 1050 by 1050 feet that would extend to a depth of 106 
feet. 

7. One axis of this square measured 1640 feet, the other 1476 feet. 

8. Hitler drew sketches for this building on November 5, 1936, in December 
1937, and in March 1940. Bismarck's official residence on Wilhelmstrasse 
had a volume of 459,000 cubic feet. The new Fuehrer's palace scheduled 
for completion in 1950 would have had a volume of 67,089,000 cubic feet, 
not counting the area set aside for offices and official business. Hitler's total 
volume of 42,372,000 cubic feet put Goering in his place, for the Reich 
Marshal envisioned only 19,479,800 cubic feet of construction. For this 
reason Hitler did not feel the need to return to the subject of Goering's 
building. 

The 919-foot garden facade of Hitler's palace could not compete with 
the 1890-foot facade of Louis XIV's Versailles, but this was only because 
the available space did not permit such a length, and I had to bend 
the two wings to form a U. Each of these wings measured 640 feet; the 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 532 

total length of the sides facing on the garden amounted to 2199 feet and 
exceeded Versailles by more than 300 feet. 

The ground-floor layout sketch for this palace has been preserved; 
from it I can reconstruct how Hitler planned to utilize the space and the 
arrangement of the individual halls. From the great square one passed 
through a monumental gateway into a 361-foot-long court of honor which 
opened onto two more courts surrounded by columns. From the court of 
honor one entered reception halls, which opened into a suite of rooms. 
There would have been several such suites, each stretching 820 feet; one 
suite, on the north side of the palace, would even have been 1247 feet 
long. From there one passed through an antechamber into the great dining 
hall. Measuring 302 by 105 feet, it covered an area of 31,710 square feet. 
Bismarck's entire residence had an area of only 12,912 square feet, and 
would thus have fitted neatly into this hall. Under normal circumstances 
a dining hall requires 16 square feet per person; thus this hall would have 
had room for almost two thousand guests to dine simultaneously. 
9. The reception room of the White House (the East Room) has a volume 
of 57,600 cubic feet; Hitler's had 741,510! The diplomats' route in the 
1938 Chancellery was 722 feet long; the new one was to extend 1654 feet. 
The visitor crossed a reception room that measured 112 by 118 feet, a 
barrel-vaulted hall that was 591 by 220 feet, a square room measuring 92 
feet on the side, a gallery 722 feet long, and a 92- by 92-foot antechamber. 
The thickness of the walls accounts for the discrepancy between the length 
of the rooms and the total length. 

10. This includes the secretariat wing on the southwestern side of the square. 
Since these secretariats were also located in the new Chancellery, a total 
volume of 49,434,000 cubic feet would have been achieved, whereas 
Siedler's building amounted to only 706,200 cubic feet. 

11. In the ridgepole raising speech on August 2, 1938, Hitler said: 

I am not only the Chancellor of the Reich; I am also a citizen. 
As a citizen I still live in the Munich apartment I had before coming 
to power. But as Chancellor of the Reich and Fuehrer of the German 
nation, I want Germany to have impressive public buildings like any 
other country; indeed, on the contrary, better than any other. And you 
will understand that I am too proud to move into former palaces. That 
I refuse to do. The new Reich will create new spaces for itself and its 
own buildings. I will not move into the old palaces. In the other na- 
tions—in Moscow they're squatting in the Kremlin, in Warsaw they're 
squatting in the Belvedere, in Budapest in the Konigsburg, in Prague 
in the Hradschin. Everywhere they're squatting in some old building! 
My simple ambition is to present the new German Reich with build- 
ings it need not be ashamed of in the presence of these princely edifices 
of the past. But above all, this new German republic is neither a 
boarder nor a lodger in the royal chambers of bygone days! While 
others are living in the Kremlin, in the Hradschin, or in a citadel, we 
will enshrine the prestige of the Reich in buildings born of our own 
times. . . . Who will move into these buildings I do not know. God 



533 ) Notes 

willing, the best sons of our Volk, no matter what their class back- 
ground. But one thing I do know: No one in the whole world should 
look down on these sons of our Volk for coming from the lowest classes. 
The moment someone is called upon to be a representative of Germany, 
he is the peer and equal of every foreign king or emperor. 

And at the dedication on January 9, 1939: 

I have refused to move into the so-called Presidential Palace. Why, 
my fellow Germans? Because that is the house in which the Lord 
Chamberlain once lived. And you know that the Fuehrer of the Ger- 
man nation cannot live in the house once occupied by the Lord Cham- 
berlain! I would rather live on the fifth floor of a private dwelling than 
settle down in that palace. I never could understand the old Republic. 
Those gentlemen set up a republic for themselves, got rid of the old 
Reich, and then they moved into the residence of the former Lord 
Chamberlain. That is so undignified, German workers! They did not 
have the fortitude to give their own state a face of its own. I decided 
to do that, and it has remained my firm decision that the new state 
shall receive its own official buildings. 

Considering the extent of Hitler's plans for the future, known only to 
him and to me, it is hardly surprising that he should have been so con- 
cerned with working out a rationale for his personal craving for prestige. 

12. I estimated that the hall would cost roughly two hundred marks per cubic 
meter (35.31 cubic feet) and the other buildings three hundred marks per 
cubic meter. 

13. The SS barracks was south of the south station, about four miles from 
Hitler's government center; the barracks for the Grossdeutschland guards 
regiment was to be only 2825 feet north of the domed hall. 

chapter 12: The Descent Begins 

1. The Vblkischer Beobachter reported on August 23, 1939: "Tuesday morn- 
ing [August 22], starting about 2:45 a.m., a very impressive display of 
northern lights could be seen in the northwestern and northern sky from 
Sternberg Observatory. 

2. Remark reported by Hitler's adjutant, von Below. 

3. Quoted from memory. 

4. On November 23, 1937, at the dedication of the Sonthofen Ordensberg 
[Order Castle], tremendous cheers erupted when Hitler— after a speech that 
had been received quietly— unexpectedly shouted to the assembled party 
leaders: "Our Enemy Number One is England!" At the time I was aston- 
ished by the spontaneity of this cheering. I was also surprised at Hitler's 
suddenly turning against England, for I had assumed all along that England 
still held a special place in his wishful thinking. 

5. As late as June 26, 1944, Hitler said in a speech delivered to a group of 
leading industrialists at Obersalzberg: "I did not want to repeat the mistake 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 534 

of 1899, 1905, and 1912, namely the mistake of waiting, of hoping for a 
miracle that would enable us to get by without fighting it out." 

6. See Hitler's statement to Hermann Rauschning that if the coming war could 
not be won, the Nazi leadership would opt for dragging the whole con- 
tinent into the abyss. (Rauschning, Hitler Speaks [London, 1939] •) 

7. Neville Henderson, Failure of a Mission (New York, 1940), p. 202f.: "My 
impression was that the mass of the German people, that other Germany, 
were horror-struck at the whole idea of the war which was being thus 
thrust upon them. . . . But what I can say is that the whole general at- 
mosphere in Berlin itself was one of utter gloom and depression." 



CHAPTER 13: Excess 

Office Journal, 1941: "On May 12, Herr Speer conferred with the Fuehrer 
at Obersalzberg concerning future parades on the grand avenue; Colonel 
Schmundt was present. The Fuehrer had already contemplated placing 
the reviewing stand in front of the ministries. The troops were to march 
by in the order of the campaigns in which they had participated, proceed- 
ing from south to north through the triumphal arch." 
According to my letter dated February 19, 1941 to the National Socialist 
Party Treasurer, the cities were: Augsburg, Bayreuth, Bremen, Breslau, 
Cologne, Danzig, Dresden, Diisseldorf, Graz, Hanover, Heidelberg, Inns- 
bruck, Konigsberg, Memel, Miinster, Oldenburg, Posen, Prague, Saar- 
briicken, Salzburg, Stettin, Waldbrol, Weimar, Wolfsburg, Wuppertal, 
and Wurzburg. 

From the transcript of my discussion with Hitler on January 17, 1941. 
In my memorandum to Bormann dated January 20, 1941, I returned the 
post of Commissioner of Construction to his staff. On January 30, 1941, 
I wrote to Dr. Ley resigning from Beauty of Labor and from supervision of 
all the building projects of the German Labor Front. According to the 
Office Journal, supervision over all construction of party centers was re- 
stored to the party treasurer, M. X. Schwarz. I also surrendered the right 
to pass on architectural writings and to appoint Gau architects entrusted 
with the National Socialist welfare projects. I informed Rosenberg that 
in the professional journal we put out together, Baukunst im Dritten Reich, 
my name would in the future appear without the title Commissioner of 
Construction for the National Socialist Party. 

My suggestion to Dr. Todt about halting construction and his reply are 
recorded in the Office Journal. 

These data are taken from the final report in the Office Journal for 1941. 
According to notations in late March and early September 1941, Norway 
was commissioned to provide 31,200,000 cubic yards of uncut granite 
and 12,050,000 cubic yards of cut granite, and Sweden was to provide 
5,473,000 cubic yards of uncut and 6,890,000 cubic yards of cut granite. 
Sweden alone had a contract for granite deliveries with a total value of 
two million Reichsmarks per year, guaranteed for a period of ten years. 



535 ) Notes 

6. This statement of Hitler's is recorded in the Office Journal, November 29, 
1941. The orders to Admiral Lorey are also quoted in the Office Journal. 

7. Details from the Office Journal entries for May 1 and June 21, 1941, and 
from the Fiihrerprotokoll, May 13, 1942, Point 7. 

8. Office Journal, November 24, 1941, and January 27, 1942. 

9. Office Journal, Autumn 1941 and January 1, 1942. 

10. Office Journal, November 11, 1941. 

11. Office Journal, May 5, 1941. 



chapter 14: Start in My New Office 

1. Letter from Dr. Todt, January 24, 1941. 

2. In the Office Journal, May 10, 1944, this passage is quoted from one of 
my speeches: "In 1940, when Dr. Todt was appointed Minister of Arma- 
ments and Munitions, the Fuehrer summoned me officially. Hitler told me 
that Todt's job of equipping the armed forces was so overwhelming that 
one person could not also handle the construction program at the same 
time. I asked the Fuehrer to reconsider his intention of putting me in charge 
of construction. For it was evident to me how much this job meant to Dr. 
Todt and what an inner struggle he would have before he could relinquish 
it. He would have been very unhappy with this solution. The Fuehrer 
reconsidered." 

3. On May 8, 1942, only three months after my appointment, Hitler reas- 
sured Rosenberg: "The Fuehrer then repeated several times that Speer's 
Ministry would be dissolved the moment the peace treaty was signed, 
and his duties would be assigned to others." (Rosenberg's notation, Nurem- 
berg Document 1520 PS.) In the same vein I wrote to Hitler on January 
25, 1944 from Hohenlychen, where I lay ill: "I need hardly emphasize to 
you, mein Fuhrer, that I have never aspired to enter the realm of politics, 
either in wartime or after the war. I regard my present activities simply as 
wartime service, and I am looking forward to the time when I will be 
able to devote myself to artistic matters which are more to my liking than 
any ministerial post or political work." 

4. See also the Office Journal, February 12: "Attempts to trespass on the 
territory of the Minister (Funk, Ley, Milch) during the first days after he 
assumed the new posts were at once recognized and nipped in the bud." 
Ley is mentioned in this account because shortly after my appointment 
he wrote an attack in the Berlin party organ Angriff which earned him a 
rebuke from Hitler. See Goebbels's diary, February 13 and 25, 1942. 



chapter 15: Organized Improvisation 

1. From my speech to the district economic advisers, delivered April 18, 
1942. 

2. In a memorandum to me on November 5, 1942, Goering confirmed this 
indirectly: "I then with great pleasure delegated these powers to you 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 536 

from my general authority, so as to prevent any working at cross-purposes. 
Otherwise I would have had to ask the Fuehrer to let me resign as Com- 
missioner of the Four- Year Plan." 

3. From the decree concerning the Commissioner General for Armaments. 

4. Office Journal, March 2, 1942. 

5. See Walther Rathenau, Die neue Wirtschaft in Gesammelte Schriften 
(1917), Vol. 5. 

6. There is an extensive literature on the organizational activities of the 
Armaments Ministry, including such works as Gregor janssens Das Min- 
isterium Speer and Rolf Wagenfuhr's Die deutsche Industrie im Kriege 
1939-1945 (Berlin, 1954) which deal with the organization of arms pro- 
duction and present the production statistics far more thoroughly than I 
ever could. According to the decree on distribution of duties (October 29, 
1943), the directive committees and pools were responsible for enforcing 
uniformity, for setting norms for multiple utilization of separately manu- 
factured parts, for economics in raw materials, for substitutions in raw 
materials to save scarce metals, for production bans on certain items, for 
output comparisons, for exchange of information, for encouraging waste- 
free stamping, for development of new processes, for limiting production 
types, for setting company production schedules, for concentration of pro- 
duction, for converting and increasing capacities, for providing labor where 
needed, for reassignment of tasks, for ordering, for distribution and proper 
use of machinery, for economies in the use of electricity and gas, and other 
such duties. 

The chairmen of the development commissions had to decide if the 
amount of time and the technical risks involved in a development program 
bore a reasonable relatiori to its potential military or economic usefulness 
and, should the development be undertaken, if there would be adequate 
facilities for producing the item. 

The directors of the directive committees, the pools, and the develop- 
ment commissions were under my immediate supervision. 

7. According to a memorandum form Personnel Chief Bohr, June 7, 1944. 

8. Office Journal, 1942. 

9. From the Indexziffern der deutschen Rustungsfertigung, January 1945. 
The statistics were based on the prices of the individual items of military 
hardware; price increases were not taken into account to avoid inflating 
the statistics. The monetary value that munitions production represented 
within the total armaments outlay for the three branches of the armed 
forces amounted to 29 percent; therefore, when this monetary value was 
doubled, it had a strong impact on the total armaments index. 

The effectiveness of our work in the three most important areas of 
armaments can be seen from the following survey: 

1. The number of tanks was increased fivefold from 1940 to 1944, 
while their gross weight rose 7.7 times. This result was achieved with a 
270 percent increase in the labor force and with a 212 percent increase 
in steel consumption. Thus, the tank committee had saved 79 percent in 
labor and 93 percent in steel in comparison with the production levels 
of 1941. 



537 ) Notes 

2. A 1941 price index of the total munitions production for the army, 
navy, and air force stood at 102; in 1944 the figure had risen to 306. This 
tripling of the total munitions capacity was achieved with a 67 percent 
increase in labor and a 182 percent increase in steel consumption. Thus, 
here too, despite the fact that mass-production methods had been applied 
before we took over, there was a reduction of 59 percent in the number of 
workers per unit of production, although we could achieve only a 9.4 per- 
cent reduction in steel consumption. 

3. The price index for all artillery increased 3.3 times from 1941 
to 1944. This increase represented an increase in the labor force of only 
30 percent, of steel consumption of only 50 percent, and of copper con- 
sumption of only 38 percent. (The percentages in these three examples are 
taken from my speech delivered at the Wartburg, July 16, 1944.) 

The organizations for agriculture and forestry were structured along 
similar lines of autonomy, with the same good results. 

10. Speech delivered April 18, 1942. By employing the principle of trust, 
"something which may strike administrative bureaucrats as a sheer im- 
possibility," I continued, "we may succeed in destroying a system which, 
if it were allowed to continue, would increasingly become a serious drag 
on the whole war economy." Doubtlessly I was exaggerating when, two 
years later, on August 24, 1944, I told my assistants in the armaments 
organization "our placing of so much trust in factory managers and tech- 
nicians is absolutely unique." 

Fourteen days previously, on August 10, 1944, I stated to the same 
group: "Our administrative system had been structured in such a way that 
each of us, down to the individual workman, was exposed to total suspi- 
cion; each was treated as if he might try at any moment to betray the 
state. In order to avoid such betrayal, double and triple safeguards had 
been instituted, so that, for instance, if a factory manager slipped through 
one barrier— perhaps the price controls— he would be caught by the surplus- 
profits tax, and then the regular taxes followed, so that in the end nothing 
was left over. This basic attitude toward the German people must be 
changed; this mistrust has to be replaced in the future by trust. Merely by 
substituting trust for mistrust within the administrative system six to eight 
hundred thousand employees can be made superfluous"— whom, of course, 
I wanted to employ in the armaments factories. 

11. See letter to Hitler, September 20, 1944, quoted in Chapter 27. 

12. Speech to fellow armaments workers, August 1, 1944. 

13. Quoted in the Office Journal, February 19, 1943. 

14. See letter of September 20, 1944. 

15. "Decree by the Fuehrer for the Protection of the Armaments Industry," 
March 21, 1942. 

16. On May 26, 1944, after an argument with SS Group Leader Kammler, 
who had had a director of the BMW motor works arrested for sabotage, I 
presented at our subsequent meeting for department heads a set of "Guide- 
lines for Procedure in the Event of Human Error in the Armaments In- 
dustry." "A body of industrialists should rule on the misconduct before 
the courts or the SS take up the matter. The Minister will not tolerate 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 538 

arrests or sentences unless the person in question has received a hearing." 
(Office Journal.) 

17. In connection with the subject of this chapter see the speech delivered in 
Essen to a group of industrialists on June 6, 1944- 

18. Nine months before I had made a vain attempt to stop the flood of in- 
coming letters. Unimportant mail was to be stamped "Return to sender. 
Not critical for the war effortl" with a facsimile of my signature. Office 
Journal, February 11, 1943. 

19. The artillery figures for 1941 include the antitank guns and antiaircraft 
guns. In 1941 production of machine guns and aircraft reached one-half of 
that of 1918; but the increased use of gunpowder and dynamite for bombs 
and mines (land and underwater) caused production to rise by 250 per- 
cent. These statistics for weaponry and aircraft may be compared only in a 
limited sense, for since 1918 the technical standards for military hardware 
had risen considerably. (The production figures for 1918 are from Wagen- 
fiihr, op. cit.) For a long time production of munitions lagged behind that 
of the First World War. In a speech delivered August 11, 1944, I made 
the comparison perfectly clear: "During the First World War better results 
were achieved in many areas, and particularly in the area of munitions, 
than in our own munitions production up to about 1943. Only in recent 
months has the peak munitions production of that world war— in Germany, 
the Protectorate, and Austria combined— been surpassed." 

20. The difficulties which our highly elaborate and autocratic bureaucracy 
created for itself and others in our war economy are illustrated by the 
following strange case, which I described in detail in a speech of April 
28, 1942: 

On February 11, 1942, an armaments firm in Oldenburg ordered 
a quart of alcohol from its supplier in Leipzig. First, a requisite slip 
from the Reich Monopoly Bureau was needed. The Oldenburg firm 
submitted its request for such a slip but was referred to the Economic 
Group, from which it was to secure a certificate of urgent need. The 
Economic Group in turn referred the matter to its Regional Office in 
Hanover, which requested and received a declaration that the alcohol 
was to be used for technical purposes only. On March 19, after more 
than five weeks, the Hanover office announced that it had already 
returned the order to the Economic Group in Berlin. On March 26 the 
Oldenburg firm made inquiries and was told that its request had been 
approved and sent on to the Reich Monopoly Bureau; at the same time 
it was explained that further correspondence with the Economic Group 
was pointless since the group had no contingency control over alcohol. 
In the future, the company should apply to the Monopoly Bureau— 
which, we should note, it had tried to do in the first place, but to no 
avail. A new application to the Monopoly Bureau, submitted on March 
30, was followed twelve days later by the reminder that the Monopoly 
Bureau was supposed to be informed of the monthly consumption of 
alcohol but that nevertheless the one quart of alcohol was as a generous 
gesture being released from a firm in Oldenburg. 

Now, eight weeks after its first request, the firm happily sent a 



539 ) 'Notes 

messenger to the depot, only to have him told that before the alcohol 
could be picked up a certificate had to be obtained from the Food 
Rationing Board, a division of the Agriculture Department. When 
queried, the local Food Rationing Board stated that it could license 
alcohol for drinking purposes only and not for manufacturing or tech- 
nical uses. Meanwhile, April 18 had arrived, and the one quart of al- 
cohol ordered on February 11 was still not in the hands of the firm 
that had ordered it, despite the fact that the alcohol was urgently 
needed for a specific purpose. 



chapter 16: Sins of Omission 

1. In my final summary on January 27, 1945, almost three years later, I 
stated: "Given a similar concentration of all our energies and ruthless re- 
moval of all impediments, we could have achieved in 1940 and 1941 the 
armaments production of 1944." 

2. The Times (London), September 7, 1942, "The Speer Plan in Action." The 
Times was not the only paper to be well informed on what was going on 
in my Ministry. About that time another English paper carried details 
which were news even to me. 

3. From speech delivered April 18, 1942. 

4. The memorandum of March 20, 1944, sent by my Commissioner for 
Factory Conversions to Martin Bormann reads: "In accordance with your 
memo of March 1, 1944, I have seen to it that the important tapestry 
factories and similar production centers for art goods are not to be closed 
down." On June 23, 1944, Bormann wrote: "Dear Herr Speer: The Com- 
mission on Crafts has reminded the Pfefferle Company (with which you 
are acquainted) of the ban on the production of picture frame moldings, 
picture frames, and the like; the company's special authorization from the 
House of German Art was not accepted. I am requested to inform you that 
the Fuehrer wishes no further obstacles placed in the way of the Pfefferle 
Company's work, much of which has been specially ordered by the Fueh- 
rer. I would be grateful if you would issue the appropriate instructions to 
the Production Department. Heil Hitler! Yours, Bormann." 

5. According to Point 18 of the FuhrerprotokoU, June 20, 1944, I reported to 
the Fuehrer that "at the moment a good 28,000 workers are building ad- 
ditions to the Fuehrer's headquarters." According to my memorandum of 
September 22, 1944, some 36,000,000 marks were spent for bunkers in 
Rastenburg, 13,000,000 for bunkers in Pullach near Munich to provide for 
Hitler's safety when he visited Munich, and 150,000,000 for the bunker 
complex called the "Giant" near Bad Charlottenbrunn. These projects re- 
quired 328,000 cubic yards of reinforced concrete (including small quanti- 
ties of masonry), 277,000 cubic yards of underground passages, 36 miles 
of roads with six bridges, and 62 miles of pipes. The "Giant" complex alone 
consumed more concrete than the entire population had at its disposal for 
air-raid shelters in 1944. 

6. On my initiative, my deputy in Franconia, Chief Architect Wallraff, put 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 54O 

difficulties in the way of Goering, for the Veldenstein project had not been 
authorized. In revenge, Goering had Wallraff shipped to a concentration 
camp. He was freed at our request after we had invoked the Fuehrer's 
decree of March 21, 1942. 

7. Speech to Central Planning. 

8. About this time my associates gave me reports on the achievements of 
Ernest Bevin, the socialist Minister of Labor in England, who had organ- 
ized the entire labor force into battalions which he could move to wherever 
they were needed. Later, in prison, I read more about this extraordinary 
feat of organization: "England's industrial war production was the most 
intensive of any country at war. The entire civilian population of England, 
including women, was really one enormous, mobile labor army which was 
sent around the country as ruthlessly as any army in the field and com- 
mitted wherever it was needed at the moment. This total mobilization of 
the English labor force was the work of Bevin." (From an article in the 
Mercator [1946].) Goebbels's diary entry for March 28, 1942, shows that 
we too at first considered mobilizing all the German labor reserves: 
Sauckel: "From a press dispatch I note that the employment of women 
It should not be too difficult to mobilize at least another million German 
workers; we need only to work energetically and not be frightened by the 
recurrent difficulties. " 

9. November 9, 1941. See Proceedings of the International Military Tribunal, 
(English edition), Vol. XXIII, p. 553. 

10. Two years later, on January 28, 1944, I voiced the following reproach to 
Sauckel: "From a press dispatch I note that the employment of women 
has progressed much further in England than here. Of a total population of 
33 million between the ages of 14 and 65, 22.3 million are active in the 
armed forces or in the economy. Of 17.2 million women, 7.1 million are 
employed full-time and another 3.3 million, part-time. Thus, out of 17.2 
million women, 10.4 million are employed, or 61 percent. By comparison, 
in Germany, out of about 31 million women between the ages of 14 and 
65, 14.3 million are employed full or part-time. That makes 45 percent. 
Thus the percentage of working women is appreciably lower than in Eng- 
land." We therefore possessed a reserve labor force of 16 percent or 4.9 
million women. (Nuremberg Document 006 Speer.) At the time I was not 
aware that even before the war, in June 1939, State Secretary Syrup of 
the Ministry of Labor had presented a plan for mobilizing 5.5 million 
unemployed women for war production; these would have been added to 
the 13.8 million women already employed. He also considered it a possi- 
bility that 2 million women could be transferred from peacetime jobs to 
the metal and chemical industries and to agriculture. (Minutes of the 
meeting of the Reich Defense Council, June 23, 1939, Nuremberg Docu- 
ment 3787 PS.) 

11. From Sauckel's proclamation, April 20, 1942. (Nuremberg Document 
016 PS.) 

12. According to Charles Webster and Noble Frankland, The Strategic Air 
Offensive against Germany (London, 1961), Vol. IV, p. 473, in June 1939 
England had 1,200,000 domestic servants, but only 400,000 by June 1943. 



54i ) Notes 

In Germany the number declined from 1,582,000 on May 31, 1939, to 
1,442,000 on May 31, 1943. 

13. These statistics are taken from the speech I delivered on April 18, 1942, 
to the district economic advisers. Of a total crude steel production of 31.2 
million metric tons per year in 1942, 2.8 million were still not going into 
armaments. 

14. Up to this time General Hannecken had handled these matters for the 
Economics Ministry; he was in a weak position vis-a-vis both Hitler and 
Goering. 

15. At the Nuremberg Trial this right to reserve decision incriminated Goering 
in the eyes of the prosecution. When I was interrogated I was able to 
declare with a clear conscience: "Goering would have been no help to 
me; we had practical work to do." The prosecution accepted this explana- 
tion. 

16. At the first meeting of Central Planning on April 27, 1942, out of a monthly 
crude steel production of 2 million metric tons 980,000 tons were allocated 
to the army, navy, and air force for armaments. This meant that the pre- 
vious quota of 37.5 percent had been increased to 49 percent, exceeding 
the allotment of 46.5 percent during the First World War (Minutes of 
Central Planning, April 27, 1942). By May 1943 we had raised the al- 
location for the armaments producers to 52 percent (Minutes of Central 
Planning, May 4, 1943). In 1943 the armaments industry thus received 
5,900,000 more metric tons of crude steel than before I had taken office. 
The percentage share of the increased steel production amounted to 
1,300,000 metric tons. 

17. Wagenfuhr, Die deutsche Industrie im Kriege 1939-1945 (Berlin, 1954) 
compares the cutbacks in consumer goods production in Britain and Ger- 
many. Using the 1938 figure as a base of 100, production in 1940 was 
still 100 in Germany and was 87 in England. In 1941 it was 97 in Ger- 
many, 81 in England; in 1942 it was 88 in Germany and 79 in England. 
But it should be taken into account that even before the war England 
had had unemployment, probably resulting in a lower standard of living 
than Germany's. 

18. Fuhrerprotokoll, June 28-29, 1 94^> Point 11. 

19. Fuhrerprotokoll, March 5-6, 1942, Point 12; March 19, 1942, Point 36; 
May 13, 1942, Point 20; and May 18, 1942, Point 9. The Office Journal, 
May 21, 1942, reports Dorpmuller's declaration of bankruptcy and his offer 
to have me made "traffic dictator." 

20. Hitler's remarks are included in a rather lengthy transcript in the Fuhrer- 
protokoll, May 24, 1942. 

21. In 1942 we managed to produce 2637 locomotives, whereas in 1941 the 
large number of models in production kept the industry down to 1918 
locomotives. In 1943, using one standard model, we produced 5243 loco- 
motives, 2.7 times as many as 1941 and twice as many as in the previous 
year. 

22. Fuhrerprotokoll, May 30, 1942. 

23. Office Journal, May 6, 1942. 

24. Office Journal, 1942: "On June 4 the Minister flew back to Berlin. . . . 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 542 

That evening there was a lecture in Harnack House on atom-smashing 
and the development of the uranium machine [sic] and the cyclotron." 

25. As late as December 19, 1944, I wrote to Professor Gerlach, who had 
been placed in charge of the uranium project: "You can always count on 
me to help you overcome any obstacles that may interfere with your work. 
Despite the very heavy drain on the labor force by the armaments industry, 
the relatively small [!] needs of your project can still be met." 

26. Fuhrerprotokoll, June 23, 1942, Point 15, states only: "Reported briefly 
to the Fuehrer on the conference on splitting the atom and on the backing 
we have given the project." 

27. Office Journal, August 31, 1942, and March 1944. In 1940 twelve hundred 
metric tons of uranium ore had been seized in Belgium. Mining of do- 
mestic ore in Joachimstal was not pushed with any real urgency. 



chapter 17: Commander in Chief Hitler 

1. The ninety-four sections of the Fuhrerprotokoll with their 2222 points of dis- 
cussion have been preserved in their entirety and provide a clear picture of 
the range of these conferences. After the meetings I dictated the general 
items while Saur and other colleagues dictated points dealing with their 
areas. But these records do not accurately convey the nature of the discus- 
sions. For in order to bolster the authoritativeness of our decisions we would 
preface them with the words, "The Fuehrer has decided," or, "In the Fueh- 
rer's opinion," even if we had fought these items through over his objections, 
or had ourselves proposed something that merely did not elicit any protest 
from Hitler. In this respect my strategy resembled Bormanns. In 1942, 
as the minutes indicate, I had twenty-five conferences on armaments with 
Hitler, in 1943 twenty-four. In 1944 these discussions were reduced to 
thirteen, a sign of my dwindling influence. In 1945, I had only two oppor- 
tunities to discuss armaments questions with Hitler, since from February 
1945 on I let Saur represent me at the conferences. See also W. A. Boelcke, 
ed., Deutschlands Rustung im Zweiten Weltkrieg: Hitlers Konferenzen mit 
Albert Speer 1Q42-1945 (Frankfurt am Main, 1969). 

2. Based on the Czech 38 T tank. In October 1944, I tried once more to win 
Hitler over to the idea of light tanks: "On the southwestern front (Italy) 
reports on the cross-country mobility of the Sherman have been very favor- 
able. The Sherman climbs mountains which our tank experts consider in- 
accessible to tanks. One great advantage is that the Sherman has a very 
powerful motor in proportion to its weight. Its cross-country mobility on 
level ground (in the Po Valley) is, as the Twenty-Sixth Armored Division 
reports, definitely superior to that of our tanks. Everyone involved in tank 
warfare is impatiently waiting for lighter and therefore more maneuverable 
tanks which, simply by having superior guns, will assure the necessary fight- 
ing power." 

3. Quotation from Hitler's speech at Obersalzberg, June 26, 1944, to a large 
group of industrialists. 



543 ) Notes 

If I recall rightly, the cadets' training academy was committed to the area 

around Astrakhan. 

From November 20 to November 24, I was at Obersalzberg. Hitler left 

there on November 22 for his headquarters at Rastenburg. 

The State Opera House on Unter den Linden, destroyed by bombing, was 

rebuilt on orders from Goering issued April 18, 1941. 



chapter 18: Intrigues 

1. Three weeks after Hitler's January 8, 1943, draft call he issued a proclama- 
tion urging fulfillment of an increased production quota for tanks. 

2. Meeting of Central Planning, January 26, 1943. The agenda was concerned 
with "the transfer of one million Germans to the armaments factories. My 
demands were not met. The number of persons employed were: 

May, 1943 May, 1944 

Trade, banking, insurance 3,100,000 2,900,000 

Administration 2,800,000 2,800,000 

Transportation 2,300,000 2,300,000 

Crafts, manual arts 3,400,000 3,300,000 

Social services 1,000,000 900,000 

Domestic services 1,400,000 1,400,000 

14,000,000 13,600,000 

(These statistics are taken from the United States Strategic Bombing Survey, 
Effects of Strategic Bombing, which in turn bases its information on the 
Kriegswirtschaftliche Kraftebilanz des Statistischen Reichsamtes.) The de- 
crease of 400,000 employed can probably be explained by the retirement 
of older persons, since the young were being drafted into the armed forces. 
On July 12, 1944, I repeated the old argument to Hitler: "The bombing 
phase of the war has shown that a life in ruins— without restaurants, without 
amusement spots, without the domestic amenities, without fulfillment of 
many everyday human needs— is perfectly possible. It has shown that busi- 
ness and banking can survive on only a fraction of their previous activity 
. . . [or] that, for example, passengers on public conveyances continue to 
pay their fares even if all tickets have been lost in fires, or that the taxation 
agencies still receive their payments even when the Finance Bureau's 
records have all been destroyed." 

3. In opposition to everyone else, Sauckel argued at a meeting held January 
8, 1943, in the Cabinet Room that it was not necessary to call up women. 
The labor force was still adequate, he held. (Office Journal.) 

4. This view of Hitler stands in contrast to the impression given by Goebbels's 
diary for the same period. Goebbels undoubtedly planned to publish parts 
of his diary once the war had been won. Perhaps it was for this reason that 
he suppressed any criticism of Hitler; but perhaps he was also afraid that 
his personal papers might some day come under scrutiny without prior 
warning. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 544 

5. See also the detailed account Goebbels gives in his diary of the meetings at 
Obersalzberg, at Hitler's headquarters, and in Goering's residence in Berlin. 



chapter 19: Second Man in the State 

1. Keitel directed that "all prisoners of war captured in the East after July 5, 
1943 are to be sent to the camps of the High Command of the Armed Forces. 
From there they are to be put to work immediately or transferred to the 
Commissioner for Labor Assignment or to the mines." (Document USA 455.) 

Hitler's reactions were unpredictable. When Canadian soldiers landed 
at Dieppe on August 19, 1942 they killed some workers from the Todt Or- 
ganization who were building bunkers there. The Canadians probably mis- 
took them for political army functionaries, since they had brownish uniforms 
and swastika armbands. At the Fuehrer's headquarters, Jodl took me aside 
and said: "I think it would be best not to mention this to the Fuehrer. 
Otherwise he will order reprisals." I said nothing myself, but since I forgot 
to pass the warning on to my representative in the Todt Organization, 
Dorsch, he reported the incident to Hitler. Far from threatening revenge, 
Hitler proved amenable to Jodl's argument that the High Command of the 
Armed Forces had made a regrettable oversight in failing to inform the 
enemy via Switzerland that the Todt Organization workers wore uniforms 
resembling those of combatants. Jodl said he would rectify this at once. At 
the time I suggested that the swastika armbands be dropped, but Hitler 
rejected this proposal. 

2. The preparations had taken so long that it was now too late to build any 
major fortifications before winter. Hitler therefore ordered (Fuhrerprotokoll, 
July 8, 1943, Point 14) that in the East about 260,000 cubic yards of cement 
should be used per month, starting in the spring and continuing for six 
to seven months. According to the Fuhrerprotokoll, May 13-15, 1943, Point 
14, some 780,000 cubic yards were used on the Atlantic Wall. Hitler even 
assented to "a correspondingly smaller amount of construction on the At- 
lantic Wall." 

3. As late as the beginning of October 1943, Hitler "did not agree that a 
stationary rear line should be built behind the Dnieper front," even though 
a few days earlier this river had already been crossed by Soviet troops. 
(Fuhrerprotokoll, September 30-October 1, 1943, Point 27.) 

4. Our efforts to simplify submarine construction were successful. The old type 
of submarine had taken eleven and a half months to build in drydock. 
Thanks to prefabrication, construction time for the new type was reduced 
to only two months in the shipyards, which were prime bombing targets. 
(Data furnished by Otto Merker, March 1, 1969.) 

5. During the winter of 1944, disorganization began to take its toll in the arma- 
ments industry, but since the naval program was now going full swing 
eighty-three U-boats were delivered between January and March 1945. Ac- 
cording to the report of the British Bombing Survey Unit, The Effects of 
Strategic Bombing on the Production of German U-Boats, in the same period 
forty-four submarines were destroyed in the shipyards. The total, including 



545 ) Notes 

U-boats lost in the yards, thus amounted during the first quarter of 1945 
to forty-two per month. To be sure, the stepped-up naval program had a 
depressing effect on shipbuilding as a whole, for the index of seagoing vessel 
construction showed a reduction from bombings, from 181 in 1943 to 166 
in 1944, a drop of 9 percent. 



chapter 20: Bombs 

1. The USSBS (United States Strategic Bombing Survey) puts the losses for 
*943 at 9 percent ("Area Studies Division Report," Tables P and QS 18). 
With a production of 11,900 medium-weight tanks in 1943, that percent- 
age represented a loss of about 1100 tanks. 

2. In Russia our 8.8 centimeter antiaircraft gun with its precision sight had 
proved to be one of the most effective and feared antitank weapons. From 
1941 to 1943, we produced 11,957 heavy antiaircraft guns (8.8 to 12.8 
centimeter), but most of them had to be deployed for antiaircraft purposes 
within Germany or in rear positions. During the same period, 12,006 of 
the heavy caliber weapons (7.5 centimeters and up) were delivered, but 
only 1155 of these were 8.8's. Fourteen million rounds of 8.8 or higher 
caliber flak ammunition were used for purposes other than antitank am- 
munition, for which only 12,900,000 rounds were provided. 

3. Fuhrerprotokoll, June 4, 1942, Point 41: "Discussed with the Fuehrer the 
telephone call between the Reich Marshal and Groh6, supporting the Reich 
Marshal." 

4. The Mohne Valley reservoir had a volume of 4,731,540,000 cubic feet, 
the Sorpe Valley reservoir 2,507,010,000. When the Sorpe Valley reservoir 
was out of action, the two remaining Ruhr reservoirs contained only 
1,176,230,000 cubic feet or 16 percent of the necessary amount of water. 
According to a statement made February 27, 1969 by Dr. Walter Rohland 
(the engineer who during the last years of the war headed the Ruhr staff), 
if the Ruhr reservoirs had all been destroyed, the shortage of water for 
cooling the coke works and blast furnaces would have reduced production 
in the Ruhr district by 65 percent. And in fact the temporary failure of the 
pumping stations had led to a noticeable decrease in gas production by the 
coke works. The major consumers could be supplied with only 50 to 60 
percent of their needs. (Office Journal, May 19, 1943.) 

5. See Fuhrerprotokoll, September 30-October 1, 1943, Point 28, and Office 
Journal, October 2, 1943. 

6. Office Journal, June 23, 1943: "The partially successful choice of bombing 
targets by the British has prompted the Minister to intervene in the choice 
of targets for the German air force. Previously, according to the testimony 
of the responsible air force officers, the Air Force General Staff has paid 
little attention to armaments facilities. The Minister appointed a committee 
consisting of, among others, Dr. Rohland (steel expert), General Manager 
Pleiger (representative of the coal industry), and General Waeger (head 
of the Ordnance Bureau); he gave the chairmanship to Dr. Carl (of the 
power industry), who was recalled from the army for this purpose." On 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 546 

June 28, I informed Hitler of the formation of this committee. (Ftihrer- 
protokoll, Point 6.) 

7. For example, the entire industry of the Dnieper region depended on one 
major power plant. According to a memorandum dated February 12, 1969 
by Dr. Richard Fischer, Commissioner for Power Supply, a 70 percent 
loss of power suffices to bring industry to a near halt, since the remainder is 
essential for supplying the needs of daily life. The distance from Smolensk, 
at that time still in German hands, to the power stations outside Moscow 
was 370-430 miles, to the Urals 1115 miles. 

8. See Hermann Plocher, The German Air Force versus Russia, 1943 (Air 
University, 1967), p. 2238. 

9. Fuhrerprotokoll, December 6-7, 1943, Point 22: "Reported to the Fuehrer 
on the suggestion submitted by Dr. Carl for the proposed Russian opera- 
tion and gave him exhaustive background studies for examination. The 
Fuehrer once again stresses that I am right to suggest that only a surprise 
attack would have any effect; in his opinion a division into three separate 
operations, as suggested by the air force, would not be suitable." 

10. See Office Journal, mid- June 1944: "The systematic way in which the 
enemy is attacking specific branches of the armaments industry is some- 
thing new. Knowledge of the weak links in our own armaments establish- 
ment has induced the Minister to undertake a survey of the Russian econo- 
my. There, too, certain targets could be pinpointed which, if destroyed, 
would cripple large parts of the armaments industry. The Minister has 
been trying for a year to persuade the air force to do something, even if a 
one-way mission proves necessary." And in Fuhrerprotokoll, June 19, 1944, 
Point 37: "The Fuehrer considers the destruction of the power plants in 
the Urals and in the upper Volga region decisive for the outcome of the 
war. He does not, however, feel that the present range and supply of 
bombers would be sufficient." On June 24, 1944, I asked Himmler, who 
had shown interest in my plan as early as March, to invite my technical 
assistant, Dr. Carl, to come and present the plan, in my presence if possible. 
The problem was to find volunteers for a one-way flight. After the attack 
the pilots would abandon their planes over remote areas, parachute to 
earth, and try to make their way back to the German front. 

11. On July 25, shortly after midnight, 791 British planes attacked Hamburg, 
and on July 25 and 26 came daylight raids by 235 American bombers, 
followed on July 27 by the second night raid, staged by 787 British planes, 
and a third by 777 British planes on July 29. This succession of heavy at- 
tacks ended August 2 with a mission flown by 750 British bombers. 

12. After the August 17 air raid the total number of ball bearings produced 
decreased, according to the Statistischer Schnellbericht zur Kriegsproduk- 
tion (January 1945), from 9,116,000 to 8,325,000. Since there was full 
production during the first half of August, it must have dropped in the 
second half to 3,750,000 or by 17 percent. With 52.2 percent of the pro- 
duction concentrated in Schweinfurt, this one attack knocked out 34 per- 
cent of our production. In July, 1,940,000 ball bearings measuring 6.3 to 
24 centimeters in diameter were produced. 

13. Answer to an RAF questionnaire, "The Effects of the Bombings," p. 20. 



547 ) Notes 

Webster and Frankland, op. cit, Vol. II, p. 62ff., indicate that the Director 
of Bomber Operations, Air Commodore Bufton, was fully aware of the 
importance of Schweinfurt. Two days before the first attack he wrote to 
Marshal Bottomley stressing that the American daylight attack had to be 
followed up by a more powerful night attack and that the crews of the 
attacking planes should be read a declaration before setting out: 

"History may prove that tonight's operation, in conjunction with the 
day attack which is taking place at this moment, will be one of the major 
battles of this war. If both operations are successful, German resistance 
may be broken and the war ended sooner than would be possible in any 
other way." He wanted the crews to know that "every vital piece of 
mechanism is dependent upon ball bearings" and that owing to extreme 
vulnerability to fire and water "literally millions" of bearings could be 
converted into "so much scrap metal." Finally he suggested that the 
crews should be told that they had "the opportunity to do more in one 
night to end the war than any other body of men." 

But Air Marshal Harris was determined to stage a series of attacks on 
Berlin. His list of targets of the same priority as Schweinfurt included 
cities with aircraft plants: Leipzig, Gotha, Augsburg, Brunswick, Wiener- 
Neustadt, and others. 

14. In fact 60 of the 291 attacking bombers were shot down. After the second 
attack was staged on October 14, 1943, 32 percent of the total production 
capacity, including 60 percent of Schweinfurt's, had been destroyed; per- 
centages based on comparison with the undisrupted production for July. 
The German capacity for ball bearings 6.3 to 24 centimeters in diameter 
had been reduced by 67 percent. 

15. On certain machines we managed to conserve 50 percent of the ball 
bearings. 

16. Air Marshal Harris successfully opposed further attacks on Schweinfurt. 
He pointed out that similar strategic bombing raids on economic targets 
such as the Ruhr dams, a molybdenum mine and on hydrogenation plants 
had proved unsuccessful. He did not realize that they had failed only be- 
cause of an inadequate follow-up. On January 12, 1944, Air Marshal Bot- 
tomley urged Air Marshal Charles Portal to order Sir Arthur Harris "to 
destroy Schweinfurt at the earliest possible date." On January 14, Harris 
was informed that the British and American air force staffs were in full 
agreement with the strategy of "attacking selected key industries known 
to be vulnerable and vital to the enemy's war effort." Sir Arthur protested 
again and had to be commanded on January 27 to attack Schweinfurt. 
(See Webster and Frankland, op. cit.) It was not until February 22, 1944 
that the American and British air forces began to carry out this order in 
coordinated day and night attacks. 

17. The production of ball bearings 8.3 centimeters in diameter and larger 
dropped from 1,940,000 in July 1943 to 558,000 in April 1944. The total 
number available decreased from 9,114,000 in July 1943 to 3,834,000 in 
April 1944 or to 42 percent. In considering the production figures for April 
1944 we must take into account that the enemy allowed us to rebuild 
freely throughout that month, so that the degree of destruction just after 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 548 

the series of attacks was significantly higher. After these attacks the ball- 
bearing industry was spared. Thus in May we were able to increase pro- 
duction to 25 percent more than April's figure, to 700,000 bearings 6.3 
centimeters in diameter. In June we reached 1,003,000 bearings, and in 
September 1944 we had again reached 1,519,000 or 78 percent of our 
original production. In September 1944 we manufactured 8,601,000 bear- 
ings of all sizes or 94 percent of the production before the bombings. 

18. According to Indexziffern der deutschen Rustungsproduktion, January 

1945. 

19. Office Journal, January 7-11, 1944. 

20. Office Journal, August 2, 1944. On the same day I issued the following 
decree: "Transfer of bearing production to underground facilities is of the 
greatest urgency. The necessary labor force has hitherto not been provided 
because the agencies responsible have not obeyed their orders [!]." A 
few months earlier, on May 10, 1944, I explained to the committee 
(only key phrases were recorded): "Bearings, etc., extraordinarily difficult 
to popularize. Means not yet found for making people see that this is as 
urgent and important as tanks and artillery. In my opinion have to ham- 
mer away at that harder. Not the fault of the Jagerstab [Fighter Staff; a 
special committee set up to speed and coordinate fighter production]; 
rather my old worry which keeps recurring: I have no grasp of propaganda 
techniques." Just issuing an order proved insufficient— even in the Third 
Reich, even in wartime. We, too, were at the mercy of the willingness of 
the people involved. 

21. German News Agency (DNB) report, August 21 and 22, 1943. 



chapter 21: Hitler in the Autumn of 1Q43 

1. See R. Brun, Allgemeine Neurosenlehre (Basel, 1954): "The patient no 
longer regulated his need for physical and mental rest automatically and 
disregarded excessive strain. . . . The conscious will is thwarted by an 
unconscious negation, which the patient attempts to overcome by frantic, 
tense overexertion. The excessive fatigue which gradually builds up would 
vanish if the patient allowed himself a rest period, but instead this fatigue 
is used by the unconscious 'devil's advocate* to disguise deeply rooted in- 
feriority feelings." 

2. Fuhrerprotokoll, November 13-15, 1943, Point 10: "The restoration of the 
National Theater and the Prince Regent Theater in Munich is to be sub- 
sidized by the Ministry. ,, These projects were never completed. 

3. The explosives industry had difficulty in keeping pace with the rising pro- 
duction of munitions for the army and for antiaircraft operations. The index 
for the production of explosives rose from 103 in 1941 to 131 in 1942 to 
191 in 1943 to 226 in 1944. But the index for munitions production, includ- 
ing bombs, rose from 102 in 1941 to 106 in 1942 to 247 in 1943 to 306 
in 1944. Although these two indexes do not provide directly comparable 
figures, they do indicate that if more bombs had been produced, there would 
not have been enough explosives to fill them. 



549 ) Notes 

4. Fuhrerprotokoll, June 18, 1943: "Pointed out to the Fuehrer that personal 
inspection of the Ruhr by him is urgently necessary. As soon as he can find 
time the Fuehrer will make the trip. ,, He never did find the time. Goebbels, 
too, wrote a month later in his diary (July 25, 1943): "Above all these letters 
repeatedly ask why the Fuehrer does not visit the areas that have come 
under heavy bombing." 

5. In his diary Goebbels often recorded remarks by Hitler, as for instance on 
September 10, 1943? "What today we cannot help seeing as a great mis- 
fortune may later seem a piece of great good fortune. Time and again crises 
and calamities in the struggle waged by our movement and our state have 
proved to have been for the best from a historical point of view." 

6. Office Journal, 1943: "By acting quickly the Minister obtained a decree 
from the Fuehrer assuring him total control of Italian armaments production. 
This decree, already signed by the Fuehrer on September 12, was re-signed 
on the thirteenth in order to indicate that the rights it granted remained 
intact despite the Duce's liberation. The Minister feared that the formation 
of a new Fascist regime in Italy would interfere with his preempting Italian 
industry to serve the needs of the German armaments industry." 



chapter 22: Downhill 

1. Thus coal mining in the Ukraine was supposed to resume in April 1942, 
and at the same time munitions production facilities were to be established 
near the front. By the end of August 1943, Soviet military successes had 
brought this program to a standstill. The so-called Protectorate of Bohemia 
and Moravia was controlled de facto by the SS, whose hold no one dared 
to challenge. There all sorts of articles were manufactured for the use of 
the SS troops. In the summer of 1943 the Ministry proposed a plan for 
producing an additional one thousand light tanks per month by making 
use of available machinery and skilled labor in Bohemia and Moravia. 
In October 1943, Hitler finally directed Himmler to stop SS production and 
grant the armaments organizations the same powers we already held in 
Germany. (Office Journal, October 8, 1943.) But since we were unable 
to operate in that industrial region until the end of 1943, the first sixty-six 
of the "Czech tanks" were not ready until May 1944. In November 1944, 
the production was 387 tanks. 

2. Fuhrerprotokoll, September 11-12, 1943, Point 14. 

3. Office Journal, September 17, 1943: "Before a late supper at the official 
guest house there was a final discussion, after the Minister had again con- 
ferred alone with Bichelonne, who had requested a private meeting to 
talk over the Sauckel operation. His government had forbidden him to 
discuss these matters officially." At the Central Planning meeting, March 
1, 1944, Kehrl reported: "Out of this discussion [between Speer and 
Bichelonne] arose the idea of restricted industries which would be pro- 
tected from Sauckel. The plan is backed by Germany's solemn commit- 
ment, as confirmed by my minister's signature." 

4. See Office Journal, September 21, 1943. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 550 

5. Fuhrerprotokoll, September 30-October 1, 1943, Point 22. 

6. A grotesque example demonstrates the extent to which the Gauleiters, as 
Hitler's immediate subordinates, disregarded decisions by the official agen- 
cies: Leipzig was the headquarters of the Reich's Central Agency for the 
Fur Trade. One day the local Gauleiter, Mutschmann, informed the direc- 
tor of the agency that he had appointed one of his friends as the director's 
successor. The Minister of Economics protested vigorously, since the di- 
rector of a central agency could be appointed only by Berlin. The Gauleiter 
summarily ordered the director to vacate his post within a few days. In 
the face of this power clash, the Minister of Economics resorted to an 
absurd solution: The night before the post was to be handed over to the 
Gauleiter's friend, trucks from Berlin drove up to the doors and transferred 
the entire fur trade agency, including its files and its director, to Berlin. 

7. In my speech of November 30, 1943, I laid down certain principles for 
any future planning: "The centers of cities should not be rebuilt in con- 
formity with pretentious artistic notions; rather, reconstruction should save 
the cities from the kind of traffic congestion we had before the war and 
which certainly threatens to be even worse after the war. ... It is clear 
that we must be as economy-minded as possible in our planning." 

In my December 18, 1943, memorandum to the Gauleiters I ex- 
panded on this theme: "Demobilization will necessitate large projects to 
absorb the huge labor force which will suddenly become available. . . . 
If we make our plans for urban reconstruction well in advance, we will 
avoid wasting valuable time after the war for city planning and will not 
have to resort to stopgap measures which in the long run would obstruct 
the planned development of our cities. ... If we start building with the 
same determination and innovative energy that we see at present in our 
armaments industry, an extraordinarily large number of housing units will 
be constructed each year. Therefore, it is essential that we think in terms 
of areas big enough for the purpose. ... If we do not prepare adequately, 
we will be forced in the immediate postwar era to resort to measures that 
will seem totally incomprehensible a few years later." 

8. See also Manstein, Aus einem Soldaterdeben (Bonn, 1965). 

9. From my memorandum, "The Importance of Nikopol and Krivoi Rog for 
German Steel Production," November 11, 1943. 

10. From my memorandum, "Alloys in Armaments Production and the Im- 
portance of Chromium Imports from the Balkans and Turkey," November 

is, 1943. 

11. See also the record of Hitler's telephone conversation with Saur on De- 
cember 20, 1943, printed in Hitlers Lagebesprechungen. 

12. See Office Journal, October 13, 1943: "By far the most upsetting item for 
the department heads was the Minister's plan of assigning one or more 
representatives from industry to each department. . . . Since this new 
arrangement involved personal qualities rather than factual issues, strong 
feelings were aroused." 

13. Dr. Gerhard Frank and Erwin Bohr. 

14. Aside from Doenitz, who was assigned exactly the same type of plane, I 
was the only leader who was regularly in a position to travel in his own 



55i ) Notes 

plane. My ministerial colleagues no longer had private planes. Nowadays, 
Hitler himself seldom flew, while Goering, as an "old" flier, felt somewhat 
nervous about using "newfangled machines." 

15. Fiihrerprotokoll, June 28-29, 1944, Point 55: "The Fuehrer stated very 
firmly that he would never agree to production of the submachine gun 
unless it were designed for ordinary rifle ammunition. Besides, he is almost 
completely convinced that the rifle suits the purpose better." On January 
14, 1944, two weeks after the trip to Lapland, the infantry program was 
initiated. The increases it brought about can be seen from the following 
table: 

Average Monthly Production 

1941 1943 Nov. 1944 

Rifles 133,000 209,000 307,000 

Submachine guns 2,600 55, 100 

New rifles 41 and 43 7,900 32,500 

Machine guns 42 and 43 7,100 14,100 28,700 

Rifle ammunition 76,000,000 203,000,000 486,000,000 

Submachine gun ammunition 1,900,000 104,000,000 

Rifle grenades 1,850,000 2,987,000 

Mines 79,000 1,560,000 3,820,000 

Hand grenades 1,210,000 4,920,000 3,050,000 

Bazooka shells 29,000 1,084,000 

16. Office Journal, January 4, 1944: "Hoping that with Himmler's and Keitel's 
aid he could stem the threatening reactivation of the Sauckel operations, 
the Minister has taken a rail motorcar to a conference presided over by 
the Reichsfiihrer-SS and attended by Waeger (chief of the Armaments 
Bureau), Schmelter (Department of Labor Mobilization), Jehle, and Kehrl 
(director of the Planning Department). The question on the agenda was: 
Who was to have the final word on transporting laborers from France to 
Germany?" 

17. Notation by Lammers, January 1944 (US Exhibit 225): "Minister Speer 
explained that he needed an additional one and half million workers; to 
be sure, that would depend on whether it proves possible to increase the 
production of iron ore. If this proves impossible, he will not need any 
additional workers. Sauckel stated that in 1944 he would have to import at 
least two and a half and probably three million new workers; otherwise 
production would decline. . . . Hitler's decision: The Commissioner for 
Labor Assignment is to furnish at least four million new workers from the 
occupied areas." 

18. By teletype, January 4, 1944, to my deputy in Paris (Nuremberg Docu- 
ment 04 Speer) and by letter to Sauckel, January 6, 1944 (05 Speer). The 
International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg declared in its judgment 
that "employees of these [restricted] factories were immune to deporta- 
tion to Germany, and any worker who received orders to go to Germany 
could avoid deportation by going to work in one of the restricted factories. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 552 

. . . [As a mitigating circumstance] it must be acknowledged that Speer's 
arrangement kept many workers at home. . . ." 
19. Office Journal, January 1944. 



chapter 23: Illness 

1. See "Report to the Fuehrer," No. 1, January 25, 1944. 

2. "Report to the Fuehrer," No. 5, January 29, 1944, includes twelve pages 
on the difficulties in my Ministry. 

3. From the case history: "On admission, January 18, 1944, the patient ap- 
peared exhausted. . . . Extremely heavy drainage from the left knee joint." 
February 8, 1944: "After standing sudden onset of extreme pain in the 
extensor muscles of the back, left side, and the iliopsoatic muscle. Ante- 
riorly radiating pain as in lumbago. Suggests acute muscular rheumatism. 
. . ." Yet Gebhardt's internist, Dr. Heissmeyer, had noted symptoms of 
pleurisy. Gebhardt ignored his findings in the treatment and clung to his 
wrong diagnosis. 

4. From Dr. Koch's testimony, March 12, 1947 (Nuremberg Document 
2602) : 

In the course of the treatment differences arose between Gebhardt 
and me. I thought that the damp climate of Hohenlychen was affect- 
ing Speer's recovery adversely, and after I had examined the patient 
and concluded that he was strong enough to be moved, I suggested 
that he be taken south [to Meran]. Gebhardt opposed this suggestion 
violently. He took cover behind Himmler, with whom he discussed the 
matter over the telephone several times. All this struck me as very odd. 
I had the impression that Gebhardt was using his position as a doctor 
to play some political game. But I do not know what it was and I did 
not bother myself over it then; I wanted to be a doctor and nothing else. 
I then tried several times to persuade Gebhardt to change his mind. 
Finally, the whole business became too much for me, and I asked to 
speak with Himmler myself. In a telephone conversation that lasted a 
good seven or eight minutes I managed to persuade him to let Speer 
be moved to Meran. Even at the time it seemed very peculiar that 
Himmler should have the power of decision in a medical matter, but 
I did not let it disturb me, since I intentionally kept out of things 
which did not fall within the sphere of medicine. I should also like to 
mention that I had the impression Speer was greatly reassured when I 
was present and holding a protective hand over him. 

In February 1945, when I had a minor collision with a truck in Upper 
Silesia and was slightly injured, Gebhardt immediately boarded a special 
plane to bring me back to his hospital. My assistant, Karl Cliever, thwarted 
this plan without giving me any reasons, although, as he indicated at the 
time, he had some. Toward the end of the war French Minister Bichelonne 
had Gebhardt operate on his knee at Hohenlychen. He died a few weeks 
later of a pulmonary embolism. 



553 ) Notes 

5. Office Journal, March 23, 1944: "In the meantime, Dr. Gebhardt, in his 
capacity as SS Gruppenfiihrer, has been entrusted by the Reichsfuhrer-SS 
[Himmler] with the safety of the Minister." 

6. I heard this from Gauleiter Eigruber himself at the Armaments Conference 
in Linz, June 23-26, 1944. 

7. This account, including the quotations, follows Dorsch's memorandum of 
April 17, 1944, and my own of August 28, 1944. At the same time Goering 
put Dorsch in charge of constructing many underground hangars to protect 
fighter planes at their home bases in the Reich. When I sent Frank to 
represent me at the April 18 meeting on these new construction projects, 
Goering refused to let Frank join him and Dorsch. 

8. Burgmann, an official of the old school, had become something of an 
intimate of Hitler's while working on the building projects for Berlin and 
Nuremberg. 

9. Message from Bormann, March 1, 1944. 

10. That same day Hitler signed my draft, which read as follows: "I commis- 
sion the director of the Todt Organization headquarters, Ministerial Di- 
rector Dorsch, to supervise the construction of the six underground hangars 
I have ordered, while retaining his other functions in your Ministry. You 
must provide the necessary prerequisites for a rapid execution of this 
project. In particular you must try to achieve a meaningful balance 
between this and other projects essential to the war effort; if necessary 
obtain my ruling on questions of priority ." 

11. This and the following quotations are taken from the Office Journal and 
from my speech to the department heads on May 10, 1944, in which I gave 
a summary of the discussion. 

12. See my speech of May 10, 1944. 

13. Letter from Goering, May 2, 1944, in reply to my letter of April 29, 1944. 



chapter 24: The War Thrice Lost 

1. See Fuhrerprotokoll, May 22-23, !944> Point 14. 

2. The first attack, on May 12, destroyed 14 percent of our capacity. This 
figure and the ones given in the text are taken from my memoranda to 
Hitler dated June 30 and July 28, 1944, as well as from my study, "The 
Effects of the Air War," September 6, 1944. 

3. The number of day and night fighter planes produced had increased from 
1017 in January 1944 (before the wave of attacks) to 2034 in June. The 
monthly average was only 849 in 1943. I defended myself against 
Goering's accusations as follows (Fuhrerprotokoll, June 3-5, 1944, Point 
20) : "I take this occasion to explain to the Fuehrer that the Reich Marshal 
is in error when he accuses me of equipping the army at the expense of 
the air force during the past two years. In spite of the bombings, airplane 
production was doubled in three months— and not by diverting production 
capacity from army equipment, as the Reich Marshal thinks, but by call- 
ing upon reserves already existing within the air armaments industry itself. 

4. See Fuhrerprotokoll, June 3-5, 1944, Point 19. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 554 

5. Decree, June 20, 1944. Goering tried to save face by directing that "arm- 
ing the German air force shaD be carried out responsibly by the Minister 
of Armaments and Munitions in accordance with the tactical require- 
ments and technical specifications established by the Commander in Chief 
of the air force. 

6. On April 19, 1944, four weeks before the attacks on the fuel industry, I 
wrote to Hitler: "Whereas in 1939 our hydrogenation plants were pro- 
ducing 2 million metric tons equivalent of petroleum (including automo- 
bile fuel), the construction of new facilities up to 1943 provided an 
increase to 5.7 million metric tons, and the facilities scheduled for com- 
pletion this year will raise the yearly output to 7.1 million metric tons." 
The machinery and components of these additional installations, with their 
extra capacity of 1.4 million metric tons per year or 3800 tons daily, could 
now be used for repairing the damaged plants. Thus Hitler's stubborn 
refusal in 1942 to relinquish this extra capacity turned out to have had its 
good side after all. 

7. See memorandum, June 30, 1944. Although some production continued, 
by December 1944 the air raids had deprived us of 1,149,000 metric tons 
of airplane fuel, twice the amount of Keitel's reserves. Theoretically these 
reserves were supposed to last only until August, since there had been a 
production loss of 492,000 metric tons. They were stretched past Sep- 
tember 1, 1944, but only by restricting airplane use to a dangerous degree. 

It was more difficult for the enemy to knock out ordinary gasoline and 
diesel fuel production becauses the refineries were widely dispersed. In 
July 1944 gasoline production decreased to 37 percent, diesel fuel pro- 
duction to 44 percent. In May 1944 the gasoline and diesel fuel reserves 
together amounted to 760,000 metric tons. Production before the attacks 
was 230,000 metric tons. 

A monthly average of 111,000 tons of bombs was dropped over Ger- 
many during the second quarter of 1944. Only one-twentieth of that amount 
(5160 metric tons) was dropped on the fuel industry in May, only one-fifth 
(20,000 tons) in June. In October 1944 the RAF dropped one-seventeenth 
of its bombs on fuel facilities, the American air force one-eighth. In 
November 1944, however, the RAF dropped one-quarter and the Ameri- 
cans one-third of their bomb loads on fuel plants. (See W. F. Craven 
and J. L. Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II [Chicago, 1949] 
Vol. II, and Wagenfuhr, Die deutsche Industrie im Kriege 1939-1945, 
Op. cit.). Since the RAFs night attacks using a mix of incendiary 
and explosive bombs proved particularly effective against fuel plants and 
refineries, before November the RAF missed a great opportunity for 
striking the closer, more easily spotted targets in the Ruhr area and along 
the coast. 

8. From memorandum dated July 28, 1944. 

9. Craven and Cate, op. cit., Vol. II. 

10. Hitler established these guidelines on August 13, 1942 in the presence of 
Keitel, Schmundt, Admiral Kranke, General of the Engineers Jakob, 
Dorsch, and me. (Fuhrerprotokoll, August 13, 1942, Point 48.) 



555 ) Notes 

11. As recorded on June 5, 1944; in addition nearly 6,000,000 cubic yards 
were used for submarine pens and other projects in France. 

12. See FiihrerprotokoU, June 3-5, 1944, Point 16. Development of the V-i 
had moved rapidly thanks to the energetic intervention of Milch, who had 
gone to the rocket test site in Peenemunde and realized that the compli- 
cated procedure was producing only meager results. In the face of the 
tacit resistance even of my Ministry, he was able to earn the credit for 
having developed ancl produced, at only a fraction of the cost and effort, 
a different weapon which did everything that had been expected of the 
Peenemunde rocket. 

13. In his June 26, 1944 speech to the industrialists, after the three military 
catastrophes, Hitler stated: "I often feel that we will have to undergo all 
the trials the devil and hell can devise before we achieve Final Victory. 
... I may be no pious churchgoer, but deep within me I am nevertheless a 
devout man. That is to say, I believe that he who fights valiantly obeying 
the laws which a god has established and who never capitulates but 
instead gathers his forces time after time and always pushes forward— such 
a man will not be abandoned by the Lawgiver. Rather, he will ultimately 
receive the blessing of Providence. And that blessing has been imparted 
to all great spirits [!] in history." 

14. Three weeks previously, in my Essen speech of June 6, 1944, I na cl de- 
nounced these leanings and promised that in peacetime our machinery for 
controlling industry would be dissolved. 

15. See FiihrerprotokoU, June 19-22, 1944, Point 20: "Gave the Fuehrer back- 
ground documents for his speech; he was satisfied with the material." 

16. Bormann refused (letter of June 30, 1944) to publish the speech, which 
has since appeared in Es spricht der Fiihrer, ed. Hildegard von Kotze and 
Helmut Krausnick (Giitersloh, 1966). 



chapter 25: Blunders, Secret Weapons, and the SS 

1. At the end of the war, I learned from Galland that insufficient interest on 
the part of the top leadership had caused a delay of about a year and a half. 

2. The figures are taken from Program 225, which was in effect from March 
1, 1944 on but which could only be implemented in part. According to 
this program, Me-262's were to be produced at the following rate: 40 in 
April 1944, increasing to 60 in July, remaining at 50 from July through 
October, rising to 210 in January 1945, to 440 in April 1945, to 670 in 
July 1945, and to 800 in October 1945. 

3. See FiihrerprotokoU, June 7, 1944, Point 6. Despite my doubts, Hitler 
stood by his order "that the Me-262's in production must be used exclu- 
sively as bombers." 

4. See FiihrerprotokoU, June 10-22, 1944, Point 35. 

5. See travel report, September 10-14, *944- 

6. According to the U. S. Air University Review, Vol. XVII, No. 5 (July- 
August 1966), a four-engine B-17 (Flying Fortress) cost $204,370. A V-2, 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 556 

on the other hand, according to David Irving's precise documentation, 
cost only 144,000 Reichsmarks, or one sixth that of the bomber. Six rockets 
delivered four and a half metric tons of explosives (1650 pounds per 
rocket). Each one was destroyed by use. A B-17 bomber, on the other 
hand, could be sent on any number of missions, had a range of 1000 to 
2000 miles, and could deliver two tons of explosives on the target. On 
Berlin alone 49,400 metric tons of explosives and bomb shrapnel were 
dropped, damaging or totally destroying 20.9 percent of the dwelling 
units (Webster and Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive against Germany 
[London, 1961], Vol. IV). To deliver the same load over London we 
would have had to use 66,000 large rockets, or the production of six years. 
At a conference on propaganda directed by Goebbels, I had to admit 
(August 29, 1944): "It is doubtful whether the V-2 can prove psycho- 
logically decisive in any way. In a purely technical sense it cannot. . . . 
Psychological effects do not enter into what I have to say. I can only 
assure you that it always takes time for a new weapon ... to reach real 
effectiveness and demonstrate what it can achieve." 

7. See Fuhrerprotokoll, June 23, 1944, Point 21. 

8. This December 12, 1942 order empowered the planners to finish the 
designs for the project and to order the machine tools, which required a 
lead time of many months. The designers could also initiate negotiations 
with the suppliers and rush the necessary allotments into the production 
process. 

9. See Fuhrerprotokoll, July 8, 1943, Points 18, 19, and 20. 

10. Further details may be found in David Irving, Die Geheimwaffen des 
dritten Reiches (Giitersloh, 1965). 

11. See Fuhrerprotokoll, August 19-22, 1943, Point 24. 

12. My predecessor, Dr. Todt, had received the honorary rank of brigadier 
general in the air force, which placed him at a definite disadvantage dur- 
ing clashes with his opponents, who held much higher ranks. This was 
sufficient reason for me to renounce this practice, which I also disapproved 
of on more general grounds. 

13. See Fuhrerprotokoll, September 20-22, 1942, Point 36. 

14. The head of the Armaments Delivery Office, Dr. Walter Schieber, asserted 
in a letter dated May 7, 1944 (Nuremberg Document 104 PS) that estab- 
lishment of the concentration camp annexes called "labor camps" was 
justified, despite much friction with the SS, because "the technical and 
the human success would outweigh the drawbacks." 

15. See Office Journal, January 13, 1944. 

16. See Ley's letter dated May 26, 1944 and my reply written the following 
day. 

17. See Fuhrerprotokoll, June 3-5, 1944, Point 21. 

18. See E. Georg, Die wirtschaftlichen Unternehmungen des SS (Stuttgart, 

1963). 

19. See Fuhrerprotokoll, June 3-5, 1944, Point 21. 

20. Eugene Davidson, "Albert Speer and the Nazi War Plans," Modern Age, 
No. 4 (1966). 



557 ) Notes 

chapter 26: Operation Valkyrie 

1. These measures were approved at the Central Planning meeting of May 
19, 1944. Seven days later, on May 26, 1944, the enemy air forces began 
the raids that succeeded in destroying twenty-six Seine bridges within a 
short period of time. 

2. See Jodl's diary for June 5, 1944; also FuhrerprotokoU, June 8, 1944, Point 
4: "The Fuehrer agrees to my instructions in case of an invasion, as set 
forth in my May 29 letter to Jodl." 

3. The detailed decree, "Re: Valkyrie," issued on July 31, 1943 by General 
Fromm as chief of army ordnance and commander of the Reserve Army, 
refers to a previous decree dated May 26, 1942. 

4. See my letter to Thierack, March 3, 1945, exonerating Fromm. 

5. See Hitler's decree of July 13, 1944. 

6. See Office Journal, July 9, 1944. 

7. See Office Journal, July 20, 1944. 

8. This schedule is printed in Der 20. Juli (Berlin: Berto-Verlag, 1961). 

9. This is clear from Remer's report, submitted two days later. 

10. See my letter to Thierack dated March 3, 1945. 

11. FuhrerprotokoU, July 6-8, 1944, Point 2. 

12. See Kaltenbrunner's report to Bormann, dated October 12, 1944, in Karl 
Heinrich Peter, Spiegelbild einer Verschworung. Die Kaltenbrunner- 
Berichte an Bormann und Hitler iiber das Attentat am 20. Juli 1944. 
Geheime Dokumente aus dem Ehemaligen Reichssicherheitsamt (Stuttgart, 
1961). 

13. I heard about this remark from Walter Funk. 

14. As Hauptamtleiter (Department Chief) in the party, I ranked lower than 
the Reichsleiters who were normally entitled to be present at such party 
meetings. 

15. Parts of this speech of Hitler's were published; see Domarus, Hitlers Reden 
(Munich, 1965). 

16. From my testimony at Nuremberg on June 20, 1946. I was able to cite 
Schacht as another witness. 

17. See Office Journal, end of August and September 20, 1944. 



chapter 27: The Wave from the West 

1. From a speech delivered to my assistants on August 31, 1944. 

2. See Office Journal, August 10 and 31, 1944. 

3. See letter dated September 20, 1944. 

4. This demand was aimed directly against Bormann's ambitions. I asked 
Hitler to let me "give the Gauleiters the necessary orders in all armaments 
and production matters without having to involve the chief of the Party 
Secretariat [Bormann]." The Gauleiters were to be instructed "to report 
directly to me and to put themselves directly in contact with me even 
when principles of armaments and war production are at issue." But 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 558 

Bormann's primitive power system depended precisely on his constantly 
giving the Gauleiters new tasks to perform for the state, while insisting 
that "all information go through him as a matter of principle" and that "for 
the sake of consistency all orders to the Gauleiters be issued only through 
him." In this way he insinuated himself between the ministries and the 
men responsible for executing ministerial orders and thus made both 
dependent on him. 

The Office Journal records that a week later, at the beginning of October, 
"Dr. Goebbels and Reichsleiter Bormann as well as the Gauleiters and 
their party agencies are constantly criticizing the armaments plants. . . . 
The Minister is now trying to settle who will have the say in armaments 
questions in the future. In spite of all arrangements with Dr. Goebbels, 
the Minister is repeatedly overruled. Admonitions to the Gauleiters never 
get past Dr. Goebbels; telephone messages are not answered until the 
damage is done. Tension and irritation are rising on both sides." About a 
week later, infuriated with the treatment I was receiving, I ordered the 
director of the Central Division for Culture and Propaganda to see to it 
"that my name no longer appears in the press." 

See the report on my travels from September 26 to October 1, 1944. A 
month later, in my report on a visit to the Southwest Army Group (Octo- 
ber 19-25, 1944), I pointed out to Hitler— citing Chief of Staff Guderian 
in support of my contention— that in September the fighting troops had 
received only a fraction of the weapons sent to them. 

Inquiries to the Quartermaster General revealed that in September 
the following amounts had been assigned for direct supply to the fighting 
troops on all fronts : 

Supplies for Supplies for newly 

front divisions formed divisions 



Pistols 


10,000 


78,000 


Submachine guns 


2,934 


57,660 


Machine guns 


1,5^7 


24,475 


2 cm. flak 


54 


4,442 


3.5 cm. flak 


6 


948 


7.5 cm. flak 


180 


748 


8 cm. mortars 


303 


1,947 


12 cm. mortars 


14 


336 


Light field howitzers 


275 


458 


Heavy field howitzers 


35 


273 


Trucks 


543 


4,736 


Caterpillar tractors 


80 


654 


Tanks 


317 


373 


Self-propelled guns 


287 


762 



According to the report on my trip of September 1944, the First Army 
deployed around Metz was defending an 87-mile front, for which it still 
had 112 field pieces, 52 tanks, 116 heavy antitank guns, and 1320 machine 
guns. For the defense of Aachen with its important industries the Eighty- 
First Army Corps had only 33 field pieces, 21 tanks, and 20 heavy anti- 



559 ) Motes 

tank guns. In the same report I told Hitler: "The supply of heavy weapons 
is so inadequate that the lines may be broken through at any point. One 
hundred tanks, each with a five-man crew, can easily crush the resistance 
of ten thousand soldiers who lack heavy weapons." 

8. See Fuhrerprotokolly June 19-22, 1944, Point 9. 

9. See Nuremberg Document RF.71 which quotes Sauckel as suggesting as 
early as April 26, 1944 that Hitler issue the following order: "To the 
Commander in Chief West and to the military commanders of France, 
Belgium, and Holland: In case of an invasion able-bodied labor must at 
all costs be kept out of the hands of the enemy. The armaments situation 
in the Reich requires that such labor be immediately placed at the disposal 
of the German armaments plants in as large numbers as possible." On 
May 8, 1944 the official minutes of a negotiating session between Sauckel 
and the French government included the following: "Gauleiter Sauckel 
states that in the event of an invasion he has given his staff a mobilization 
plan providing that any workers who become available will be transported 
to Germany with the utmost efficiency." Following the cabinet meeting 
presided over by Lammers on July 11, 1944, Keitel informed the military 
commanders of France "that drastic measures must be taken for capturing 
French workers." I decided on the contrary that "despite the invasion, 
production in France must be continued, and deportation of labor to the 
Reich should be considered only for factories producing high-priority 
machinery which is in short supply." (Office Journal) 

10. Telegram sent September 13, 1944 to the Gauleiters of the Ruhr area: 
"On principle, plants are only to be crippled temporarily by removing 
various elements to safety, particularly the electrical ones." For mining 
and the steel industry such measures were planned only as a last resort; 
these facilities, therefore, were almost certain to be exempted. 

11. Quotation from an editorial by Helmut Siindermann, the acting press chief, 
written September 7, 1944. A few weeks later Siindermann explained 
regretfully to me that Hitler had dictated this text to him, down to the 
very details. 

12. From my travel report, September 10-14, 1944* 

13. On September 16, 1944, Bormann agreed to extend these instructions of 
Hitler's to the occupied areas in the West— Holland, France, and Belgium 
—and to all the eastern, southern, and northern Gaus of the Reich. In a 
letter written September 19, 1944, to the chairman of the Armaments 
Commission and to the armaments inspectors I assumed responsibility for 
all cases in which a factory had to be surrendered intact to the enemy. "In 
the future I will consider it worse to cripple a factory too hastily than to 
leave it intact if the order to cripple comes too late." On September 17 it 
was established that if the anthracite and soft-coal mines on the left bank 
of the Rhine were occupied, the technical directors would remain with a 
skeleton staff in order "to prevent flooding of the shafts or other harm to 
the mining facilities." On October 5, 1944, instructions were also issued 
to the power plants by the Central Electricity Agency, which was directly 
under my Ministry. 

14. See my memorandum of September 5, 1944, and the Fuhrerprotokoll, 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 560 

August 16-20, Point 5: "The Fuehrer has established a minimal economic 
area'; the idea is to determine in detail how long this area can achieve an 
increased degree of armaments production using only the available sup- 
plies and facilities in the area." 

15. Memorandum, September 5, 1944. Our nickel and manganese supplies 
lasted five months longer than our chromium reserves. And, since we had 
replaced thousands of miles of copper cable in the high-tension lines with 
aluminum cable, we had a seventeen-month supply of copper on hand, 
although copper had once been one of our most critically scarce metals. 

16. These quotations are taken from the travel reports for September 26- 
October 1, October 19-25, and December 7-10, 1944. 

17. Diary entry by Jodl, November 10, 1944. 

18. The quotation about stretching explosives by adding mineral salts is taken 
from my memorandum of December 6, 1944 on nitrogen supplies. Nitro- 
gen was essential for explosives production. Before the attacks Germany 
and the occupied areas were producing a total of 99,000 metric tons per 
month. In December 1944, that figure had dropped to 20,500. In Sep- 
tember 1944, 4100 tons of additives were used with 32,300 tons of 
explosives; in October, 8600 tons with 35,900 tons; and in November, 
9200 tons with 35,000 tons. (Interim report issued by the Planning Bureau 
in January 1945.) 

19. According to "Output Survey" issued by the Technical Bureau on February 
6, 1945, deliveries of day and night fighter planes before the attacks on 
the aircraft factories were 1017 in January 1944. In February, during the 
attacks, they amounted to 990, in March to 1240, in April to 1475, in May 
to 1755, in June to 2034, in July to 2305, in August to 2273, and in Sep- 
tember to 2878. These increases were largely achieved by cutting back 
other production, particularly production of multiengined models. Accord- 
cording to the Indexziffern der deutschen Riistungsendfertigung (January 
1945), the total weight of all the planes delivered rose from an index 
figure of 232 in January 1944 to only 310 in September, or by 34 percent. 
During this period the percentage of total plane production represented 
by fighter planes rose (by weight) from 47.7 to 75.5 percent. 

20. See Fuhrerprotokoll, August 18-20, Point 10. 



chapter 28: The Plunge 

1. See memorandum, November 11, 1944. 

2. There is no doubt that the enemy's hopes for an end to the war in the 
winter of 1944-45 would have been fulfilled if the chemical industry had 
been knocked out. For, in general, transportation recovered much faster 
than we expected. Thus, for instance, daily freight-car loadings (aver- 
aging 139,000 in 1943) were still 70,000 in January 1945, 39,000 in 
February, and 15,100 in March— still a ninth of the original loadings. 
Thanks to its large reserve stocks the armaments industry was able to 
meet a quota which called for more raw materials than were being trans- 
ported at the time. The index of total armaments production was 277 in 



561 ) Notes 

1944 (223 in 1943). In January 1945 it had dropped by 18 percent to 
227, in February by 36 percent to 175, in March 1945 by about 50 per- 
cent to 145— and this with a ninth of the original transportation. In 1943 
there were 225,800 metric tons (so-called Quartermaster-General tons) of 
munitions produced. In January 1945 this type of production still 
amounted to 175,000 tons, or 75 percent of the 1943 figure— although the 
nitrogen supply was only one eighth as large. In 1943 the average monthly 
delivery of tanks, tank destroyers, heavy artillery, and self-propelling guns 
was 1009; in January 1945 it was 1766. In 1943 there were 10,453 trucks 
and light tractors produced; in January 1945 there were 5089. In 1943 
there were 1416 half-track tractors produced; in January 1945 there were 
916— but only one fourth of the previous amount of fuel was available for 
running these vehicles. The disastrous developments in the chemical in- 
dustry were thus the decisive factor in diminishing our combat readiness. 

3. Fuhrerprotokoll, October 12, 1944, Point 27. 

4. In Hitler's opinion, only the death of Tsarina Elizabeth saved Frederick 
from tasting to the dregs a defeat that had already been decided. 

5. Fuhrerprotokoll, January 3-5, 1945, Point 23. 

6. From the teletype message to Hitler, January 21, 1945, and the memo- 
randum, January 16, 1945. 

7. See Hitler's radio address, January 30, 1945. 

8. The first quotation is from page 693, the second from page 104 of the 
1935 edition of Mein Kampf. In my cell at Nuremberg I found the follow- 
ing quotation on page 780; it completes the two previous ones: "But then 
all those will be called before the judgment seat who today, in possession 
of power, trample on laws and rights, who have led our people into desti- 
tution and ruin, and who, when their Fatherland was suffering, valued 
themselves above the life of the community. ,, 



CHAPTER 29: Doom 

1. I also left it to Saur to brief Hitler on the armaments situation. On January 
20, according to the records, I had my last such conference with Hitler; 
after that he held the regular sessions on February 14 and 26 and on March 
8 and 22 with Saur. 

2. The draft of March 15, 1945, was prepared with the technical assistance 
of Colonel Gundelach, chief of staff to the Commanding General of the 
Army Engineers. 

3. Instructions dispatched by circular letter, March 12, 1945. 

4. I quoted this remark of Hitler's in the letter I wrote to him on March 29, 
1945. At that time I softened it with, "If I did not misunderstand you. 
. . ." But this phrase was merely intended to give Hitler a chance to pretend 
he had not made the statement. In the same letter I summarized the impact 
Hitler's words had on me as follows: "These words shook me to the core." 

5. The Fuehrer's order for the destruction that was to be purposefully carried 
out in the Reich read in full: 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 562 

The struggle for the very existence of our people forces us to seize 
any means which can weaken the combat readiness of our enemy and 
prevent him from advancing. Every opportunity, direct or indirect, to 
inflict the most lasting possible damage on the enemy's striking power 
must be used to the utmost. It is a mistake to believe that when we win 
back the lost territories we will be able to retrieve and use these trans- 
portation, communications, production, and supply facilities that have 
not been destroyed or have been temporarily crippled; when the enemy 
withdraws he will leave us only scorched earth and will show no con- 
sideration for the welfare of the population. 

Therefore, I order: 

1. All military, transportation, communications, industrial, and 
food-supply facilities, as well as all resources within the Reich which 
the enemy might use either immediately or in the foreseeable future for 
continuing the war, are to be destroyed. 

2. Those responsible for these measures are: the military commands 
for all military objects, including the transportation and communications 
installations; the Gauleiters and defense commissioners for all industrial 
and supply facilities, as well as other resources. When necessary, the 
troops are to assist the Gauleiters and the defense commissioners in 
carrying out their task. 

3. These orders are to be communicated at once to all troop com- 
manders; contrary instructions are invalid. 

This decree was directly contrary to the requests I had made in my 
March 18 memorandum: "If the war advances farther into Reich territory, 
measures should be taken to assure that no one has the right to destroy 
industrial installations, coal mines, electric plants, and other facilities, nor 
transportation installations and inland waterways. Demolition of bridges as 
planned would do more lasting damage to the transportation network than 
all the bombing of the past few years." 

Kesselring had added the notation: "To be implemented by the Com- 
mander in Chief of the army group," thus placing all responsibility for dis- 
regarding the orders on the shoulders of his subordinate, Field Marshal 
Model. 



chapter 30: Hitlers Ultimatum 

1. See my letter, March 3, 1945, to Minister of Justice Thierack and his reply, 
March 6. 

2. See the "Minutes of the Conference with the Fuehrer, March 22, 1945," 
signed by Saur. 

3. So far as I know, Florian decided not to publish the proclamation after all. 
It is possible that he made his remarks about the worthlessness of the Ger- 
man people during some earlier discussion. 

4. Hitler had ordered that the army command was to be responsible for demo- 
litions within a five- to nine-mile-wide "war zone." 



563 ) Notes 

5. The "implementation instructions for the Fuehrer's order of March 19, 
1945 (re: communications facilities)/' issued at 4 p.m. March 27, read: 

Communications facilities are to be destroyed by dynamiting, fire 
or demolition. Items to be rendered totally unusable are: telephone, 
telegraph and amplification stations and centrals (wire lead-in points, 
switchboards, junction boxes, pylons and, if sufficient time is available, 
above-ground lines and long-distance cables), stocks of telegraph equip- 
ment of all types, cables and wiring, factory records (cable layout plans, 
wiring diagrams, descriptions of devices, etc.), the major radio facilities 
(broadcasting and receiving stations, towers, antennas. Efforts should 
be made to remove beforehand especially valuable parts. . . . Special 
orders follow for the national capital and its immediate environs, in 
particular for the radio stations in Nauen, Konigswusterhausen, Zeesen, 
Rehmate, and Beelitz. 

6. After my release from imprisonment Seebauer, who at the time had been 
one of my department heads, informed me that during my illness in the 
spring of 1944 Hitler had already picked Saur to be my successor. 

7. In his last situation conference on April 27, 1945, Hitler reacted more 
sharply: "Failure to obey one of my orders would mean immediate an- 
nihilation, a leap into the void for any party leader. ... I can scarcely 
believe that a party leader to whom I gave an order would dare not to 
carry it out." (Stenographic record, printed in Der Spiegel, No. 3 [1966].) 

8. The order, transmitted through Jodl, was issued on March 29 and for- 
warded on March 30 to the Reichsleiters and Gauleiters by Bormann. 

9. These instructions and measures are enumerated in the Geheime Reichs- 
sache (a "classified" information sheet), March 30, 1945. 

10. My teletype message to all the waterways directors under my jurisdiction 
read: "On the basis of the Fuehrer's decree of March 30, 1945, destruction 
of locks, sluices, dams, drawbridges, and harbor installations is strictly 
forbidden unless I have given instructions to the contrary.— Copy, for in- 
formation, to: Wehrmacht Operations Staff; request transmission to subor- 
dinate military agencies." 

11. Hitler's decree of April 7, 1945, read as follows (with the passage Hitler 
crossed out in italics): 

To assure uniform execution of my decree of March 19, 1945 I 
decree the following for transportation and communications: 

1. Operatively important bridges must be destroyed in such a 
way that they cannot be used by the enemy. Areas or sectors (rivers, 
parts of the autobahn, etc.) where such bridges are to be destroyed 
will be determined from case to case by the High Command of the 
armed forces. The harshest penalties must be inflicted if these bridges 
are not destroyed. 

2. All other bridges must not be destroyed until the defense 
commissioners along with the competent agencies of the Ministry of 
Transportation and the Ministry of Armaments and War Production 
determine that the approach of the enemy makes it essential to halt 
production or transportation to those areas. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 564 

To assure that production continues until the last possible moment, 
I ordered in my decree of March 30, 1945, that transportation must 
be maintained up to the last possible moment [even if the enemy's 
rapid movement creates the risk that a bridge (with the exception of 
those designated in point 1) may fall into his hands before it can be 
destroyed], 

3. All other objects and installations important for vehicular 
movement (other manufactured objects of every sort, rails, ballast, and 
repair shops), as well as the communications facilities of the postal 
system, the railroad system, and of private companies are to be effec- 
tively incapacitated. With regard to all measures for demolition and 
evacuation it must be borne in mind that, with the exception of the 
instances treated separately under point 1, when lost territory is 
recovered these installations should be usable for German production. 

Headquarters, April 7, 1945 Adolf Hitler 

This decree had the following advantages: It could hardly be expected 
that the agencies involved would ever make the necessary evaluations in 
time. The orders to destroy railroad and communications facilities, loco- 
motives and freight cars, and to sink ships, were now canceled. The threat 
of harsh penalties was restricted to the most important bridges, since the 
penalties did not apply to points 2, and 3. 
12. On April 7, 1945, Keitel dispatched an "urgent" teletype message merely 
giving instructions for the total destruction of bridges important to military 
operations. He avoided any positive interpretation of the positive elements 
of Hitler's decree, thus sabotaging their effectiveness. 

chapter 31: The Thirteenth Hour 

1. The first draft of this speech was written April 8, 1945; the draft softened 
for the benefit of the press is dated April 10, 1945. 

2. Dr. Gerhard Klopfer declared in his affidavit of July 1947: 

A short time later Speer requested Dr. Hupfauer to ask me how I 
felt about his intention to publicly defend Dr. Brandt during the pro- 
ceedings against him. I thereupon informed him that I had the distinct 
impression that the proceedings against Brandt were also aimed against 
Speer himself. I asked him therefore not to appear in public, giving 
the originator of the proceedings [Bormann] the desired pretext for 
launching a possibly planned attack against Speer. 

3. Hitler's air force adjutant, von Below, had taken care of this matter. 

4. I had outlined these consequences to Hitler in my memorandum of March 
15, 1945. See footnote on p. 437 in Chapter 29. 

5. The complete text of this speech, written April 16, 1945, follows: 

Never before in history has a civilized people been struck so hard; 
never have the destruction and war damage been so great as in our 
country, and never has a people borne the hardships of war with greater 



565 ) Notes 

endurance, hardiness, and loyalty than you. Now all of you are de- 
pressed, shaken to the core. Your love is turning to hate, your endurance 
and hardiness to fatigue and indifference. 

This must not be. In this war the German people has displayed a 
determination which in days to come will, if history is just, be accorded 
the highest honor. Especially at this moment we must not weep and 
mourn for what is past. Only desperately hard work will enable us to 
bear our fate. But we can help ourselves by realistically and soberly 
deciding what the essential demands of the hour are. 

And here we find there is only one main task: to avoid everything 
that could rob the German people of its basis for life, a basis already 
so diminished. Preservation of our places of work, of the transportation 
network, and of all other installations necessary to the feeding, clothing, 
and sheltering of our people is the first prerequisite for preserving our 
strength as a nation. In this phase of the war, therefore, we must avoid 
anything which could inflict further damage on our economy. 

As the Minister responsible for all production, for the preservation 
of roads, waterways, and power plants and for the restoration of trans- 
portation, I therefore order, in agreement with the highest authorities 
of the various branches of the armed forces: 

1. Destruction or crippling of any bridge, plant, waterway, rail- 
road, or communications facility is henceforth prohibited. 

2. All explosive charges on bridges are to be spiked and all other 
preparations for demolition or incapacitating are to be eliminated. If 
a plant has already been crippled, the parts removed are to be returnee. 

3. Local measures to protect the plants and the railroad and com- 
munications networks should be instituted at once. 

4. These instructions apply not only to the Reich but also to oc- 
cupied Norway, Denmark, Bohemia, Moravia, and Italy. 

5. Anyone who acts counter to these instructions is consciously 
and intentionally inflicting harm on the German people and thus be- 
comes an enemy. The soldiers of the armed forces and the militia are 
hereby instructed to proceed against these enemies of the people with 
all possible means, if necessary by the use of firearms. 

In not destroying bridges that were intended to be blown up, we 
are giving our enemies an advantage in their operations. For this reason, 
but more for the sake of humane warfare, we urge our enemies to cease 
air raids on German cities and villages even if these contain installations 
important to the war effort. For our part we must make arrangements 
for the orderly surrender of cities and towns which are completely en- 
circled. Cities which lack effective means of defense should be declared 
open cities. 

To avoid injustices and serious blunders during this last phase of 
the war, the following instructions are issued in the interests of the 
German people: 

1. Prisoners of war and foreign workers are to remain in their 
places of work. Those who are already on the move should be directed 
toward their home countries. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 566 

2. In the concentration camps the political prisoners, including the 
Jews, should be separated from asocial elements. The former are to be 
handed over unharmed to the occupying forces. 

3. Punishment of all political prisoners, including the Jews, is to 
cease until further notice. 

4. Service of the Volkssturm [People's Militia] against the enemy 
is voluntary. In addition it is the militia's duty to assure law and order 
within the country. Until the enemy occupation begins, members of the 
National Socialist Party are obligated to work with the militia in order 
to demonstrate that they wish to serve the people to the end. 

5. The activities of the Werewolf and similar organizations must 
cease at once. They give the enemy a just pretext for reprisals and also 
threaten the foundations of our strength as a nation. Order and meeting 
our obligations are essential prerequisites to the survival of the German 
people. 

The destruction which this war has brought upon Germany can be 
compared only with that of the Thirty Years' War. But losses in human 
lives from hunger and epidemics must never be allowed to take on 
the proportions they did then. The enemy alone can decide whether 
he will try to win his place in history as a decent and generous victor 
by conferring on the German people the honor and conditions deserved 
by an opponent who, although vanquished, can be said to have fought 
bravely and well. 

But each one of you can do his part to protect our people from 
the worst. During the next few months you must summon up even more 
of the determination to rebuild that you, German workers and factory 
directors, and you, German railroad men, have shown time and again 
during the devastating air raids. The last few months of paralyzing 
horror and boundless disappointment have produced an understandable 
lethargy. But that must go nowl God will only help a nation that does 
not give up, even in so desperate a situation. 

For the immediate future I give you the following guidelines to be 
followed in areas already occupied by the enemy: 

1. The most important task is repair of the damaged railroads. 
Therefore, if the enemy gives permission or orders, every possible means 
must be employed, no matter how primitive, to carry out this work of 
reconstruction. For transportation makes it possible to provide food to 
large areas in which the population would otherwise face grave short- 
ages. And only if you manage to patch up a transportation network 
will you ever be reunited with your families. Therefore, it is in the per- 
sonal interest of each one of you to do everything possible to restore 
transportation. 

2. Industrial and manual workers, who have performed incom- 
parable feats during this war, are under obligation to carry out as quickly 
as possible all assignments connected with rebuilding the railroads; other 
tasks should be put aside for the time being. 

3. During six years of war the German farmer has been highly 
self -disciplined; he has been an example to the nation in delivering his 



567 ) Notes 

products according to his own instructions. In the days to come every 
German farmer must raise his production to the highest possible level. 
It can be taken for granted that the German farmer will cultivate this 
year's crop in fullest awareness of his duty. He knows how large a 
responsibility he bears to the German people. 

4. Food must receive transportation priority over everything else. 
Food-producing plants must receive electricity, gas, coal, or wood before 
any other factories are supplied. 

5. Government bureaus must not be dissolved. Bureau chiefs bear 
full responsibility for keeping them in operation. Anyone who leaves his 
place of work without his supervisor's permission is committing a crime 
against the nation. Administration is necessary if we are to preserve the 
German people from chaos. 

If we work with the same determination that we have demonstrated 
during the past few years, the German people will survive without more 
great losses. Transportation can be fairly adequately restored within 
two or three months. According to our calculations, modest but sufficient 
food supplies can be maintained in the area west of the Oder River until 
the next harvest. Whether our enemies will permit this remains to be 
seen. But I pledge to devote all my strength, up to the very end, to the 
survival of the German people. 

The military blows which Germany has received during the last 
few months have been shattering. Our fate is no longer in our own hands. 
Only a more merciful Providence can change our prospects for the 
future. We ourselves, however, can help save ourselves not only by going 
about our work industriously, facing the enemy with dignity and self- 
confidence, but also by becoming more modest in our hearts, by prac- 
ticing self-criticism, and by believing unshakably in the future of our 
nation, which will remain forever and always. 

May God protect Germany! 
The note read: 

April 16, 1945 
Dear Herr Fischer: 

Since the communications lines will soon be severed, I may need 
to resort to the radio transmitters for issuing basic instructions, for in- 
stance concerning crippling rather than destroying, etc. You are per- 
sonally responsible for providing electricity to the stations up to the 
last moment, including the Werewolf station in Konigswusterhausen. 
Power may be shut off only after enemy broadcasts prove that the trans- 
mitting facilities have been seized. Cordially, Speer 

Next I went to the Commander in Chief of the army group, Field Marshal 
Busch, who agreed that even if there was fighting the Elbe bridges in Ham- 
burg would not be destroyed. At the same time he agreed not to use the 
Wiesmoor Power Station in the Ems region (15,000 kilowatts) as a military 
base. This power plant was important as a source of emergency electricity 
to Hamburg, since in the near future coal shipments or overland deliveries 
could not be counted on. 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 568 

chapter 32: Annihilation 

1. Kaufmann had tried to contact the British in order to surrender Hamburg, 
although Hitler had declared the city a fortress. On April 22, the Konigs- 
wusterhausen station was no longer available. 

2. SS General Berger told me this at Nuremberg. 

3. It had already been decided that in the event of a military partitioning of 
Germany a northern area would be under Doenitz's command, while Hitler 
reserved control of the southern area for himself. However, on April 2, 1945, 
Bormann uttered the following challenge to the party functionaries: "Any- 
one who leaves his Gau under enemy attack without specific orders from 
the Fuehrer, anyone who does not fight to the last breath, is a groveling 
coward. He will be considered a deserter and treated as such. Pluck up 
your courage and overcome your weaknesses. The word of the hour is: 
Victory or deathl" 



chapter 33: Stations of Imprisonment 

See the letter to Doenitz, May 7, 1945. On May 5, I had already reported 
to Doenitz via his "Chief of the Civilian Cabinet," Wegener: "As soon as 
the problem of handing over the areas now occupied and the last unoccu- 
pied parts of the Reich has been settled, I shall resign from directing the 
activities of the two ministries and shall no longer be available as a member 
of the government now being formed." Doenitz asked me to stay on. On 
May 15, 1 again directed the following request to Schwerin-Krosigk: "When 
the list of ministers is presented, the following must be noted: (1) Herr 
Speer considers it essential that he be replaced by a suitable successor as 
Minister of Economics and Production, so that he may place himself at the 
disposal of the Allies. His experience may be called on temporarily during 
the transition for reconstruction of manufacturing and the building indus- 
try " 



chapter 34: Nuremberg 

1. In each of the heavy oak cell doors was an opening about ten inches square 
through which the prisoners could be observed. 

2. These quotations are from the examination by Flachsner and the cross- 
examination by Jackson. 

3. In a letter to my wife in August 1946, I described the reaction of my co- 
defendants: "Most of the defendants have taken a very sour view of my 
activities during the last phase of the war. I can imagine pretty well what 
steps they would have taken had they found out at the time. There would 
not have been much left of the family." 

4. After a pause I replied to the tribunal: "I hesitate to describe details, be- 
cause such things are unpleasant. I am doing so only because the court has 



569 ) Notes 

requested it. ... I do not intend to cite my role during this phase as part 
of my defense." 
5, From the cross-examination by Jackson. 

chapter 35: Conclusions 

1. In general the authenticity of the documents presented was questioned 
neither by the defense attorneys nor by the defendants. Whenever a docu- 
ment was challenged, the prosecution withdrew it from evidence, with one 
exception: the Hossbach transcript of the meeting at which Hitler an- 
nounced his war aims. In his memoirs Hossbach has since confirmed the 
authenticity of that document. 

2. Almost two decades later President Kennedy said at his press conference of 
August 20, 1963: "What we now have . . . will kill three hundred million 
people in one hour/' (The New York Times, August 21, 1963.) 

3. In mid-August, I wrote to my family about my final speech and my prospects 
in the trial: "I must be prepared for anything. It is hard to say who will 
be more deserving of pity after the sentencing. . . . Flachsner has become 
a pessimist. For my part, I must not place my personal fate in the fore- 
ground. My concluding words will therefore not even deal with my case." 
Early September 1946: "Yesterday I had my final say. I tried once more to 
do my duty. But I doubt that it will be acknowledged. I must travel a 
straight and narrow path even if no one understands that today. 

4. These hopes were deceived. As Eugene Davidson points out in The Trial of 
the Germans (New York: Macmillan, 1966), as early as February 17, 1946, 
under Allied Control Law Number 3, General Clay introduced a compulsory 
labor policy into the American Zone. On March 28, 1947, I wrote in my 
Nuremberg diary: 

Deportation of labor is unquestionably an international crime. I do 
not reject my sentence, even though other nations are now doing the 
same thing we did. I am convinced that behind the scenes during the 
discussions about German prisoners of war someone will point to the 
laws on forced labor and to their interpretation and prosecution by the 
Nuremberg Tribunal. Could the discussion of this matter in our press 
be so open and critical if for months on end forced labor had not been 
publicly denounced as a crime? . . . The conviction that my sentence 
is "unjust" because "the others" are making the same mistake would 
make me more unhappy than the sentence itself. For then there would 
be no hope for a civilized world. Despite all the mistakes, the Nurem- 
berg Trial was a step in the direction of recivilization. And if my twenty 
years of imprisonment could help the German prisoners of war to get 
home only one month earlier, it would be justified. 

5. It became obvious that the victors were sitting in judgment over their 
vanquished enemies. This was most apparent from a passage in the Doenitz 
judgment: "These orders [to sink ships without warning] prove that Doe- 
nitz is guilty of violating the Protocols [of London]. ... In consideration 



INSIDE THE THIRD REICH ( 57O 

of Admiral Nimitz's answer to the questionnaire that in the Pacific Ocean 
from the first day of its entry into the war the United States practiced 
unrestricted submarine warfare, the penalty imposed on Doenitz is not 
based on his infractions of the international regulations for submarine 
warfare." In this case technical developments (use of aircraft, better navi- 
gational procedures) had taken precedence over legal conventions, over- 
whelmed them and pushed them aside. Here was one example of how 
modern technology is capable of creating new legal concepts, to the detri- 
ment of humanity— concepts which can result in legalized death for count- 
less human beings. 

Hitler repeated the announcement of his intentions on January 30, 1942: 
This war will not end "as the Jews imagine, by the extermination of the 
European-Aryan peoples, but the outcome of this war will be the anni- 
hilation of Jewry." 



Inde 



x 



Aachen, 290, 403-404 
Abel, Adolf (architect); 51 
Abyssinia, Italian invasion of, 71 
Adolf Hitler Endowment Fund of Ger- 
man Industry, 87, 265 
Adolf Hitler Schools, 25n., 122-123 
Africa Corps, 246; surrender of, 215, 292 
Air Ministry, 289, 322, 332; building 

plans for, 136-137 
Air-raid shelters, 182, 217 
Airraids: 

—German: on Warsaw, 227; on England, 
281^282, 283; misdirection in Russia, 
282-283; on London, 283, 284; 
V-weapons, 355-356, 364-365, 369 
—Western Allied: on Berlin, 182, 286, 
287-289, 478; on German cities, 213, 
215, 255, 262, 263, 278, 283-289, 314, 
363; 1944, effect on transportation, 
224; on dockyards, 274; effects on ar- 
maments production, 278, 284-286, 
336, 346-348, 349-350, 406, 407; ar- 
maments emergency caused by, 229, 
346; on Cologne, 279-280; on Ruhr 
reservoirs, 280-281, 347n.; selective 
bombing, 280-281, 282, 285-287, 
347n., 352; on Hamburg, 283-284; on 
ball-bearing plants, 284-286, 347n.; 



Hitler's disinterest in their effects on 
citizenry and civilian casualties, 299- 
300; on aircraft industry, 332, 347n.; 
on fuel industry, 346, 348, 349~35o, 
406; on Ploesti oil fields, 348; Rommel 
on, 353; in support of Normandy inva- 
sion, 354, 355; average daily bomb ton- 
nage (1944), 365; precision of, 377; 
prevent supply movement for Ardennes 
offensive, 416, 417, 418; on Bremen, 
494; Speer's evaluations of, for RAF 
and USSBS, 285, 499-5oo 

Air warfare, 278-291; Hitler's plan for 
subjugation of England by, 183, 229; 
Hitler's disinterest, 242, 281, 299-300; 
area bombing vs. nerve center pinpoint 
attacks, 280, 281-283, 352; technologi- 
cal vs. military use, 283; Hitler's mis- 
taken emphasis on offensive vs. defen- 
sive use and weapons in, 363-366; 
Speer's discussions with USSBS, 499- 
500. See also Antiaircraft defense 

Aircraft carriers, 166 

Aircraft industry: Allied bombing of, 332, 
347n.; put under Speer's Ministry, 348- 
349; Hitler's order to stop production, 
407-409. See also Bomber planes; 
Fighter planes; Jet planes 



( 573 ) 



Alexander the Great, 368 

Alfieri, Dino (Italian diplomat), 14211., 

147 

Allies, Western: appeasement policy, 72, 
110-111, 164; war declaration, 164- 
165; home-front attitudes, 214-215, 
221, 255-256; armies better supplied 
with modern equipment, 279; Hitler's 
opinion of soldiers and leaders of, 121, 
306-307, 459. See also Air raids, West- 
ern Allied 

Allkett tank factory, 289 

Alpine Redoubt, 465, 474 

Alsace-Lorraine, Hitler's thoughts on, 
120-121 

Amann, Max (early Nazi, and Hitler's 
publisher), 35, 86 

American soldier, Hitler's low opinion of, 
121, 306, 459 

Ammunitions, production figures, 210 

Anderson, General F. L., 499, 500 

Andrus, Colonel (American head of Nu- 
remberg prison), 508, 512 

Angriff (Nazi party newspaper), quoted, 
20, 73, 39on. 

Antiaircraft armored truck, 353-354 

Antiaircraft defense of home front: as 
drain, 278-279; nonexistent against 
U.S. raids across Alps, 338; fighter fleet 
insufficient, 351, 407-409; Hitler bars 
Me-262 from use for, 363; neglect of 
new weapons in favor of offensive ones, 
363-366; gun production increased, 
408-409 

Anti-Semitism, 17, 111-112; Hitler's, 19, 
20, 98, 112, 523; pre-World War I 
Vienna, 98. See also Jews 

Architecture: modern, 18, 42; Hitler's in- 
terest in, 28-31, 39-43, 79-8o, 132- 
133; Hitler's tastes, 41-42, 171-172; 
plans for Berlin, 34, 73~79, 132-143, 
151-160, 172-173 (see also Berlin); 
so-called "Fuehrer's style" a sort of 
neoclassicism, 42-43; monumental, Hit- 
ler's reasons for, 55-56, 69-70, 74, 138, 
157; plans for Nuremberg, 55, 62, 64, 
66-70; theory of "Ruin Value," 56, 
!54; Speer's tastes, 62-63, 136, 184, 
315; plans for Linz, 79, 99, 143; neo- 
classicism widely used in capital cities, 
81; Hitler quoted on durability of, 114, 
115; from neoclassicism to nouveau 
riche, 136; effect of Hitler's building 
programs on, 142-143; Speer's histori- 
cal theory of stylistic expression of 
political decline, 159-160; "neo-Em- 
pire," 160; Escorial, 184; demolition of 
historic buildings, 314-315; change in 



Index ( 574 

Speer's concepts and philosophy of 
planning, 315 

Ardenne, Manfred von (physicist), 226 

Ardennes offensive, 406, 415-418 

Arent, Benno von (stage designer), 110 

Aristotle, quoted, 180 

Armaments: prewar, 163; naval, 166, 
271, 272-274; Speer's initial involve- 
ment in, in construction for, 182, 183, 
204; interservice rivalry in, 183, 199- 
203, 365^-, 380; air, 183, 283, 289, 
299, 332, 348-349, 407-409, 45o; Hit- 
ler's interest in, and conferences on, 
231-236; Speer's jurisdictional fights, 
200-203, 204-207; Speer's organiza- 
tional scheme, 204-205, 208-213; plant 
dispersal blocked, 287 

—industry: principle of "industrial self- 
responsibility," 25n., 208-209, 211, 329, 
397, 42on.; mass production methods 
introduced, 208-209, 224; labor needs, 
210, 217-221, 255-256, 264-265, 269, 
312, 320, 374; Nazi party (Gauleiter) 
interference in, 287, 329, 359, 396-397, 
412; underground shelters for, 336- 
337, 339-340; Himmler's (SS) intru- 
sion attempts, 369-370, 37^-374, 4*2; 
disintegration, late 1944, 412, 414- 
415; Speer's last reports, on collapse of, 
424-425, 436 

—production: bomber, U.S. vs. German, 
183, 289; increase from 1942 on, 208- 
209, 309; statistics, 210; World War I 
comparison, 213; forced labor in, 219- 
220, 264-265, 269, 369-371, 374-375, 
5i6n., 522; crude steel needs, 221- 
222; effects of bombing on, 229, 278, 
284-286, 336, 346-348, 349-350, 406, 
407; chromium shortage, 229, 316-317, 
405-406; of spare parts lagging, 234- 
235; Speer speech on (June 1943), 268; 
tugs-of-war about priorities, 272-273, 
337; ball bearings a bottleneck, 284, 
285, 286; plan to raise capacity through 
harnessing of French, etc., industries, 
309-3 11 , of infantry weapons, 319; of 
fighter planes, 348, 351, 407; Speer 
speech on (June 1944), 358; V-2, 368, 
369-370; peak reached, 393; explo- 
sives, 406; Panzerfaust, 413m; of 
poison gas, 41311., 4*4; coal shortage, 
414-415; at standstill, 424, 433, 445 

Armaments Ministry: Speer's appoint- 
ment to, 195, 197-199; his reorganiza- 
tion of, 209-210; Naval armaments 
taken over by, 273; expanded to in- 
clude all war production, 274-275; 
destroyed by bombing, 288; intrigues 



575 ) Ink* 

against Speer in, 317-318, 328-330; 

plan to separate construction industry 

averted, 340-343, 349; air armaments 

taken over by, 332, 348-349; Speer's 

powers curtailed, 442, 450-451; his 

powers restored, 455-456 
Armistice: of June 1940 with France, 

170-171; of May 1945, 497 
Armored units, German: Second Tank 

Corps, 399; Sixth SS, 417. See also 

Tanks 
Army Ordnance Office, German, 233, 288, 

366 
Arromanches, 353 
Art: Hitler's views on, 14; Hitler's tastes, 

27, 41, 42, 43-44, 130-131, 179; "de- 
generate," 27, 184; confiscations in 

occupied areas, 178-179 
Assassination plans: July 20 plot, 379- 

389; Speer's, 429-431, 517 
Astrological sheets, 411 
Athenia, S.S., 165 
Atlantic Ocean, U-boats withdrawn from, 

292 
Atlantic Wall, 281, 352-353, 377; U-boat 

shelters, 194, 272 
Atom bomb, 226, 227; project scuttled, 

227-229. See also Nuclear research 
Attohco, Bernardo (Italian Ambassador), 

164 
Augsburg, a "reconstruction city," 176 
Auschwitz, 376 

Austria, annexation of (Anschluss), 109 
Authoritarianism: A German tradition, 8, 

33; Hitler's, 19, 27, 82, 202, 207; 

Speer's fight against, 211-213; Allied 

overestimation of strengths of, 287; in 

age of technology, 520-521 
Autobahn, 180, 193; workers' barracks, 35 
Avranches, 353 n « 
Axmann, Arthur, Reich Youth Leader, 

465 

Baarova, Lida (actress), 146, 254 

Backe, Ernst, Minister in Doenitz gov- 
ernment, 498 

Badoglio, Marshal Pietro, 307 

Balkans, importance of holding, 317, 405; 
in Soviet hands, and Hitler's planned 
"surprise" recapture, 434 

Ball, George, 499 

Ball-bearing production: vulnerability to 
bombing, 280, 285; bombing effects 
on, 284-286, 347n.; Allied miscalcula- 
tion, 286-287; plant dispersal blocked, 
287 

Bastogne, 418 

Battle of the Bulge, 459 



Battleships, 166 

Bauer, Hans (Hitler's pilot), 128 
Baukunst der Germanen, Die (Haupt), 11 
Baumbach, Werner (pilot), 466, 494, 496 
Bayer-Leverkusen, 435n. 
Bayreuth Festival, 130, 149-150 
"Beauty of Labor," 57, 146 
Beck, General Ludwig, 392n. 
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 9, 463 
Begas, Reinhold (sculptor), 115 
Behrens, Peter (architect), 18, 42, 145 
Belgium: harnessing of industries of, and 

forced labor stopped, 310, 311; 

scorched earth policy circumvented, 

40211. 
Below, Colonel Nikolaus von (Hitler's air 

force adjutant), 162, 261, 275; as 

Speer's liaison to Hitler, 35on., 422, 

4^4, 437 

"Bendlerstrasse," 380. See also High 
Command of the Armed Forces 

Berchtesgaden, 46. See also Obersalzberg 

Berger, SS Obergruppenfiihrer Gottlob, 
373, 465, 476 

Berghof . See Obersalzberg 

Bergmann, Profesor Gostav von, 106 

Bergner, Elisabeth (actress), 12 

Berlin (see also Chancellery): museum 
island, 78; Olympic Stadium, 80; plans 
for Mussolini Square, 110; destruction 
of synagogues and Jewish shops (1938), 
111-112; Victory Column, 140; Unter 
den Linden, 141; prosperity of, 141; 
old Reichstag building, 151-152; 

— city planning, 74, 77-79; urban renewal, 
77-79, 139; axial structure, 77, 78, 141; 
railroads, 77, 78; housing, 77, 78; air- 
ports, 78 

— Hitler's building plans for, 73-79, 132- 
143, 151-160, 172-173; plans con- 
ceived in early 1920's, 74-75, 135; 
north-south avenue, 73, 74, 76, 77, 
134-135, 138, 141-142, 151; great 
domed hall, 74, 75, 77, 135, 138, 152- 
155; triumphal arch, 74, 75, 76, 135, 
149; monumental proportions, 73, 74, 
75, 76, 134, 135, 138, 153-154, 155, 
157; Hitler's core idea vs. Speer's 
urban renewal plan, 77-79; cost esti- 
mates, 77, 140-141, 157-158; East- 
West axis, 77, 148; models, 132-133, 
149, 152; Speer's judgment of in retro- 
spect, 134, 138, 159-160; central rail- 
road stations, 134, 137, 138; Soldier's 
Hall, 135-136, 145; martial accents, 
136, 181; Air Ministry, 136-137; Town 
Hall, 138, 145; sign of megalomania, 
138, 156-157, 160; target date for com- 



Berlin (cont.) 

pletion, 139, 154, 177; secrecy main- 
tained, 139, 168; preservation of old 
landmarks, 139-140, 151; materials for, 
144, 154, 177, 181; architects commis- 
sioned for major projects, 145; final 
chancellery, 34, 151, 156-157, 158- 
159; new Reichstag, 152; Adolf Hitler 
Platz (future), 152, 154, 155-156, 158, 
177; table of volume calculations, 157; 
security aspects, 158-159; continua- 
tion in spite of war, 176-177, 180-181 

—wartime: bombing, 182, 286, 287-289, 
478; luxury places closed, 257; museum 
art objects saved, 436n.; saving of 
bridges, 437n., 467-468; last months 
in, 420, 462-463; defense preparations, 
467-468, 474, 476; battle for, 477- 
478, 480; hope for capture by Western 
Allies, 481 

Berlin-Erkner, ball-bearing plant, 285, 
286 

Berlin Institute of Technology, 11, 14 

Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra, 60, 462- 
463 

Berliner Zeitung, quoted, 497n. 

Bernadotte, Count Folke, 486 

Bestelmeyer, German (architect), 145 

Bichelonne, Jean (French Minister of Pro- 
duction), 310-311 

Bismarck, Prince Otto von, 55, 114, 118, 
129, 149, 156, 257, 464 

Bittrich, S.S. General, 399 

Black market, 322 

Blomberg, Field Marshal Werner von, 48, 
70, 107, 136, 243 

Blood Purge of 1934, 51-53 

Bodenschatz, General Karl, 245, 263 

Bohr, Erwin (Personnel Chief in Arma- 
ments Ministry), 328 

Bollbrinker, Colonel, 386, 387 

Bomber planes: JU 88 dive bombers, 
182; U.S. vs. German production, 183, 
289; Hitler's emphasis on, 283, 299, 
363; Me-262 fighters as, 363-364; plan 
for long-range jet bomber, 425 

Bombing. See Air raids 

Bonatz, Paul (architect), 50, 80, 145 

Bormann, Martin, Reichsleiter: his inevi- 
table presence, 40, 87, 120, 128, 296, 
426, 473; characterization of, 87-88; 
as a schemer 87-88, 123, 126, 252- 
254, 261, 485; a philanderer, 89, 93, 
146; his note-taking of Hitler's pro- 
nouncements, 95; campaign against 
churches, 95, 123, 177; as ideologist, 
122, 123; and secret weapons rumors, 
449; his orders disregarded and foiled 



Index ( 576 

by his deputy, 458; plans for arrest of, 
466; during Hitler's last days, 478-479, 
484, 485, 487-488; and Goering's 
"treason," 482-483, 488; trial in ab- 
sentia, 5ogn.; mentioned, 47, 92, 98, 
389, 393, 419, 447, 462, 464 

Hess's— official positions and functions: 
secretary, 40; deputy to Minister of 
Churches, 67; in charge of Obersalz- 
berg complex, 84-85, 93, 215-216; 
manages Hitler's finances, 86-87, 150; 
his dominant position with Hitler, 87, 
88, 252-254, 297; Gauleiters subordi- 
nate and allied to, 87, 219, 311-313; 
takes over Hess's functions, 175; at 
situation conferences, 24on.; on "Com- 
mittee of Three," 252-253, 256, 271; 
usurps field of domestic policy, 252- 
253, 258; "Secretary to the Fuehrer," 
253-254, 294; designated Party Minis- 
ter, 487, 488 

—relations with other Nazi leaders, 87; 
with Goebbels, 91, 256, 267; gift to 
Goering from Adolf Hitler Fund, 265; 
his foes, 275, 466; with Himmler, 314; 
alliance with Goebbels, 397-398 

—Speer's relations with, 168, 176-177, 
193, 202-203, 212, 215-216, 219, 361, 
466; Goebbels-Speer group tries to de- 
throne B., 258-265, 267; B.'s efforts to 
block expansion of Speer's powers, 
274-277; B. allied with Gauleiters 
against Speer, 313-314, 34^-343; suc- 
ceeds in undercutting Speer with Hit- 
ler, 313, 317, 320-321, 330, 336; in 
collusion with Dorsch in Speer Minis- 
try, 328; intrigue against Speer dur- 
ing latter's illness, 329, 330, 336, 343; 
B. put back in place, 342, 343-344; 
B. opposes "industrial self-responsibil- 
ity," 397; B. aids in modifying 
scorched earth policy, 404-405 

Borries, Siegfried (violinist), 318, 319 

Bose, Herbert von (aide of von Papen), 

53 

Bothe, Walther, 228 

Bouhler, Philip, Reichsleiter, 107, 151 

Boullee, Etienne L., 154, 159 

Brandt, Dr. Karl (Hitler's physician), 65, 
104, 105, 146, 150, 179, 275, 502; and 
Speer's illness, 33<>-33i> 335; cooper- 
ates on medical improvements in labor 
camps, 371; in charge of gas warfare 
defense, 413; arrest of, 465, 466, 476, 

477 
Brauchitsch, Field Marshal Walther von, 

107, 467 
Braun, Eva, 93, 100, 104, 105, 130, 147, 



577 ) Index 

175, 256, 297; secrecy of her relation- 
ship with Hitler, 46-47; at Obersalz- 
berg, 46-47, 88, 89, 90, 91, 9^-93; 
dependence on Bormann, 86; Hitler's 
conduct toward, 92-93, 101; back- 
ground and characterization, 93; jewel- 
ry of, 93; in Berlin, 130, 465; last days, 
465, 472, 476, 479, 484-485 

Braun, Wernher von, 365, 366-368, 505; 
Himmler's arrest of, 371-372 

Breker, Arno (sculptor), 90, 114, 115, 
137, 145, 146, 170-172, 178, 311, 322 

Bremen: a "reconstruction city," 176; 
bombing of, 494 

Brennessel, Die (party humor sheet), 125 

Breslau: art gallery, 178; battle of, 423n. 

Bridges: Rhine, 377; Remagen, 435, 444; 
Speer's efforts to prevent demolition of, 
435-437, 441, 455, 457, 467-468, 495; 
of Berlin, 437n., 467-468; "scorched 
earth" orders, 453, 455, 456n., 460 

Brinkmann (Vice President of Reich 
Bank), 124-125 

British air raids on Germany, 279, 280- 
281, 282, 283-284, 285, 287 

Brix, Joseph (architect), 13 

Bruckner, Anton, 99, 130, 463 

Bruckner Lieutenant Wilhelm (Hitler's 
adjutant), 35, 52, 65, 67, 70, 111, 172 

Brugmann, Walter (aide to Speer), 337 

Buber, Martin, quoted, 20 

Bucher (industrialist, head of AEG), 212, 
394n. 

Bug River, fortifications on, 269 

Buhle, General Walter, 234, 458; ap- 
pointed chief of armaments for the 
army, 420 

Bulge, Battle of the, 459 

Bulow, Count Bernhard von, Reich Chan- 
cellor, 118 

Bunkers, Hitler's, 217, 391, 430, 431, 473 

Bureaucracy: Hitler's use of existing civil 
service, 25; Hitler quoted on, 35; Hit- 
ler's distrust of, 63, 202, 297; vs. 
Speer's "organized improvisation," 
210-213 

Burkel, Joseph, Gauleiter, 313, 40211. 

Busch, Field Marshal Ernst, 493 

Butefisch (industrialist, head of Leuna 
Works), 347 



C-2 rocket. See Waterfall rocket 

Calais, Hitler expects Allied invasion at, 

355 
Cannstatt, ball-bearing plant at, 285, 286 
Capitulation of Germany, 497 
Cassirer, Bruno (publisher), i8n. 



Cassirer, Ernst (author), 49 

Casualties: Russian, 302; German, due to 

wrong decisions, 304 
Caucasus, German drive in (1942), 238- 

239; Kuban bridgehead, 270 
Central Planning Board, 221, 255, 275, 

284 
Central Works (V-2 labor camps), 369, 

370-371, 375 

Chancellery, Berlin, 34, 156; Chancellor's 
apartment, 28-30, 117-119, 156; "his- 
toric balcony," 34, 158, 159; 1938 
building, 34, 102-103, 113-115, 116, 
117, 156; gallery, 103, 114; reception 
hall, 103, 113; Hitler's daily routine 
at, 117-120, 128-131; table talk, 120- 
128; of 1938, intended for later use by 
Hess as party HQ, 137; Hitler's plans 
for 1950, 151, 156-157, 158-159; 
bunker, 217, 430, 431, 473; destruction 
of, 478, 485 

Chaplin, Charlie, 36 

Charlemagne Untersberg legend, 86 

Chemical industry, effects of bombing 
on, 346, 348, 349-350, 406 

Cherbourg, 359, 401 

Chesnay, France, Nazi leaders' imprison- 
ment at, 503-504 

Christian, Colonel Eckard, 303, 478 

Christianity, Hitler on, 96 

Chromium shortage, 229, 316-317, 405- 
406 

Churches, 177; Hitler on, 95, 123; party 
leaders ordered to remain in, 95-96 

Churchill, Sir Winston, 214, 300; quoted 
on visit to Berlin in 1945, 116; First 
Lord of Admiralty, 165; on Hess's 
flight, 175; Hitler's low opinion of, 
306-307; and gas warfare, 413 

Cities: building projects, 143-144, 176- 
177 (see also Berlin; Linz; Nuremberg); 
"reconstruction cities," 176-177; "new 
cities," planned in occupied areas, 182; 
Allied bombing of, 213, 215, 255, 262, 
263, 278, 279-280, 283-289, 314, 363; 
demolition of historic buildings, 314- 
315 

Civil service. See Bureaucracy 

Clodius, Ambassador, 382 

Coal industry, Speer's efforts to prevent 
demolition, 434, 435, 446, 467 

Coal shortage, 414 

Cocteau, Jean, 159 

Cologne, 1942 air raid on, 279-280 

Colonial Ministry, Hitler's plans for, 135 

"Committee of Three," 252-253, 256, 
260, 396; plan to reactivate Reich De- 
fense Council against, 258-265 



Communications facilities, demolition or- 
ders, 442, 451, 456n., 460; revoked, 
460 

Communism promoted by industry, in 
Hitler's view, 309 

Communists, 14, 19, 23 

Concentration camps: not mentioned by 
Hitler, 94; labor, 144, 369-370, 522; 
labor for V-2 production (Central 
Works), 369, 370-371, 375; Hanke's 
hint at Auschwitz, 375-376; Speer calls 
for safe release of prisoners, 469 

Conspiracy of July 20, 1944. See Putsch 

Construction industry: Speer's early war 
efforts, 182, 183, 185, 190-191, 204; 
Todt in charge of, 194; Goering-Dorsch 
intrigue, 336-343; priority given to 
underground shelters for industry, 337, 
340; intrigue against Speer averted, 
340-346, 349; Atlantic Wall work, 
352-353. See also Todt Organization 

Consumer goods production, 214, 222; 
cutbacks, 222, 256; cutbacks blocked 
by Gauleiters, 274, 313; labor em- 
ployed in, 274, 312; shift to France 
proposed, 310-311, 312 

Cortot, Alfred (pianist), 503 

Coudenhove-Kalergi, Count Richard (au- 
thor and politician), 8 

Council of Ministers. See Reich Defense 
Council 

Courland, German units cut off in, 420- 
421 

Cyclotron, 225, 226, 227-228 

Czechoslovakia: caught in "pincers," 109; 
forced to surrender Sudetenland (1938), 
110-111; German occupation of (1939), 
115-116, 147-148; prevention of 
"scorched earth" demolitions in, 434, 
496 

"Death Rays," 464 

Decline of the West (Spengler), 12 

De Gaulle, General Charles, 170 

Degrelle, Leon, 122 

De Mille, Cecil B., 12, 159 

Democratic procedures: Hitler's elimina- 
tion of, 19; disparaged by Hitler, 107, 
306; Speer deplores lack of, 185; intro- 
duced to war economy by Speer, 211 

Denmark, prevention of demolitions in, 
495-496 

Derain, Andre", 184 

Despiau, Charles, 159, 184, 503 

Deutsche Mark, conversion figure, i3n. 

Dietrich, Dr. Otto, Reich Press Chief, 35, 
40, 47, 65, 91, 150, 298, 381 

Dietrich, SS General Sepp, 189, 190, 191, 



Index ( 578 

332, 354, 364; Commander of SS 

bodyguard, 35; suggests killing Russian 

POW's, 268; in Ardennes offensive, 418 

Directive Committee for shipbuilding, 

273-274 
Dnepropetrovsk, Russia, 189-191, 237 

Dodd, Thomas, 508 

Doenitz, Grand Admiral Karl, 271-274, 
275, 336, 412, 426; appointed Com- 
mander in Chief of the Navy, 272; 
successor to Hitler, 479, 487-488, 493, 
497-498; his actions as Chief of State, 
493-496, 498, 500; ends demolition 
policy, 495-496; cabinet of, 498-499, 
501; imprisonment, 501, 502; in Nu- 
remberg trial, 515; mentioned, 427, 
480 

D'Olier, Franklin, Chairman of USSBS, 

499 

Dornberger, Colonel Walter (head of 
Peenemunde rocket station), 366-368 

Dorpmuller, Julius, Minister of Transpor- 
tation, 222-224, 498, 503 

Dorsch, Xaver (department head in Ar- 
maments Ministry), 199, 231, 317-318, 
335, 389; heads Todt Organization, 
20911., 269; Nazi party inside man in 
Speer's Ministry, 328-329; replace- 
ment attempted by Speer, 329-330; 
misinformation about Speer's illness, 
334n.; in charge of underground shel- 
ters for industry, 336-337; put in 
charge of construction under Speer, 

339-343 
Draft, 397; artists' records destroyed, 
167, 463; total conscription proposed, 

419 
Dunkirk, Goebbels quoted on, 254-255 
Dusseldorf, 448 



Ebert, Friedrich, Reich President, 64 
Eckart, Dietrich (poet), 101 
Economy: prewar, 65; plan for European 
economic integration, 310. See also 
Four- Year Plan; Industry; War econ- 
omy 
Eder Valley dam, bombing of, 281 
Education, Nazi, 25n., 122-123; aimed 

at specialization, 112, 123 
Education and Science, Ministry of, 225 
Edward VHI, King (later Duke of Wind- 
sor), 72 
Eicken, Professor Karl von, 104 
Eigruber, August, Gauleiter, 335 
Eisenhower, General Dwight D., men- 
tioned, 486, 498, 499, 503, 504 
Elections: of 1930, 14; of July 1932, 



579 ) I^ex 

campaign for, 22-24; of November 
1932, 25 
Electoral system, nominal retention of, 

Electric power plants, bombing of: Ruhr, 
280-281; Soviet plants not bombed, 
282-283 

Electronics industry, 279 

Engel, Colonel Gerhard, 382; as Hitler's 
army adjutant, 162, 275; as frontline 
commander, 399-400 

England: Hitler's interest in global ar- 
rangement with, 71, 165, 176; appease- 
ment policy, 72; Ribbentrop as Am- 
bassador to, effect on relations, 
108-109; prewar exchange of notes 
with, 164; declaration of war, 164- 
165; air war against, plan for, 183, 
229; mobilization of labor, 214, 221; 
air raids of 1939-41 misdirected by 
Hitler, 281-282; V-2 rocket attacks on, 
364-365, 369 

Escorial, the, 184 

Esser, Hermann, State Secretary in Min- 
istry for Tourism, 35, 92, 101, 295 

Ethiopia, Italian invasion of, 71 

Evacuation decrees (March 1945), 438- 
439, 441, 447-448, 460 

Evangelical Church, 95 

Expansionism, 523; to east, 19, 180, 182, 
306, 309; Germanic imperial goals, 70, 
138-139, 152, 181-182; Hitler's colo- 
nial plans, 135 

Explosives, production of, 406 



Faulhaber, Cardinal Michael, 101 

Fellgiebel, General Erich, 379, 380, 383, 
390 

Fellner, Ferdinand (architect), 41 

"Fighter Aircraft Staff," 332 

Fighter planes, 332; neglect of produc- 
tion in favor of bombers, 299, 363- 
364; production increase, 348, 351, 
407; for homefront protection, 351, 
407-409; losses on Western front, 351, 
407; Me-262 jet, 362-364, 445; Hit- 
ler's obstinate stand against, 363-364, 
408-409; disobeyed, 409; number 
available at start of war, vs. 1944, 
407; "people's fighter," 412; use of, on 
Western vs. Eastern front debated, 422 

Fink, Werner (comedian), 139 

Finland: Soviet attack on, 169; Speer's 
visit to, 318-320; armistice with Soviet 
Union, 405 

Fischer, E. R. (industrialist, Chairman of 
Board of I. G. Farben), 347 



Fischer, Richard (industrialist, general 
manager of Berlin Electricity Works), 

469 

Fischer von Erlach, Johann Bernhard 
(architect), 333 

Flachsner, Dr. Hans (Speer's defense at- 
torney), 265, 511, 515, 5i6, 517, 5i8, 
523 

Flags, use for decorative effect, 59-60 

Flettner, Anton (aircraft designer and 
engineer), 504 

Florian, Friedrich Karl, Gauleiter, 447, 
448 

Flying bombs, 364. See also V-i; V-2 

Flying Fortresses, U.S., 285, 365 

Food industry, efforts to prevent demoli- 
tion of, 436, 457 

Forced labor: concentration camp in- 
mates, 144, 369-371, 375, 522; Goer- 
ing denies guilt, 202; Speer's admis- 
sion of responsibility, 2i9n., 370, 375- 
376, 5i6n.; foreign, 219-221, 256, 
320-321, 374, 5i6n., 522; Sauckel in 
charge of foreign, 219-221, 264-265, 
309, 320-321, 333, 5i6n.; Ukrainian, 
221; Russian POW's, 269, 374, 522; 
French, 309, 311, 321; deportations 
from Western European nations 
stopped, 310-311; from West, re- 
sumed, after conference with Hitler, 
320-321; Speer's attempts to alleviate 
hardships, 370-371, 375; SS labor 
camps, 374; Speer calls for safe re- 
lease of, 469; factor in Nuremberg 
Trial, 370, 375, 5i6n., 522 

Forster-Nietzsche, Elisabeth, 64 

Four-Year Plan, 183, 194, 195, 196, 200, 
343; entire economy covered by, 200; 
armaments production in relation to, 
201-202, 205-206, 274-275; and 
labor problems, 218-219, 220; Central 
Planning Board, 221, 275 

France: appeasement policy, 72; declara- 
tion of war, 165; German victory of 
1940 over, 169-170; 1940 armistice, 
170-171; harnessing of industrial pro- 
duction of, and forced labor stopped, 
309-311; forced labor from, 309, 311, 
321, 401; restricted factories, 311, 321, 
401; Speer's efforts to save historic 
buildings, 3i5n.; "scorched earth" pol- 
icy circumvented, 401-402; revival of 
industry after liberation, 434 

Frangois-Poncet, Andr6, 81 

Frank, Gerhard (assistant to Speer), 329, 
338, 339, 503 

Frank, Hans, Governor General of Po- 
land, 62; in Nuremberg trial, 515, 519 



ir 



Frank, SS Obergruppenfuhrer Karl Her- 
mann, 457, 486 

Frank, Robert (industrialist; friend of 
Speer), 145-146, 331 

Frederick III, King of Prussia and Ger- 
man Emperor, 104 

Frederick die Great, King of Prussia, 78, 
140, 419, 453, 463 

Frederick William I, King of Prussia, 140 

Freemasons, persecution of, 33 

Frick, Wilhelm, Minister of the Interior, 
60, 124, 256; replaced by Himmler, 
311-312 

Fritsch, General Werner von, 107, 108 

Fritzsche, Hans (department head in 
Ministry of Propaganda), 25on., 410, 
411; in Nuremberg trial, 511, 514, 520 

Fromm, General Friedrich, Chief of Army 
Armaments, 200-201, 215, 234-235, 
236, 270, 378; in charge of mobiliza- 
tion, 167; Chief of Reserve Army, 200, 
234; interest in new weapons, 225, 
226, 367; on Hitler as military leader, 
241; and events of July 20, 1944, 378, 
380, 38311., 384-385, 387-388; execu- 
tion of, 445; mentioned, 205, 275, 336, 

383 

Fuchs, Vice Admiral, 181 

Fuel industry: shortages, 182, 346-348, 
350-351, 406; Western Allied bomb- 
ing of, 346, 348, 349-350; Ruhr coal 
cut off", 414 

Funk, Walther, Minister of Economics, 
76, 124, 180, 196, 200-202, 322, 329, 
336, 381, 446; as State Secretary in 
Propaganda Ministry, 49, 54; and Hin- 
denburg, 52n., 54; as President of 
Reich Bank, 124-125; allied with 
Goebbels group against Bormann, 254, 
256, 258, 263; role in placing aU war 
production under Speer, 274-275; on 
Himmler-Gebhardt scheme against 
Speer's life, 331-33^; admits belief in 
own lies, 357; in Nuremberg prison, 
508, 514; in trial, 513, 514, 515, 519 

Furtwangler Wilhelm, 9, 60, i39n., 462- 
463 



Galbraith, J. K., 499 

Galland, General Adolf, 289-290, 351, 

407-409, 466 
Ganzenmiiller, Theodor, State Secretary 

in Ministry of Transportation, 223-225 
Gamier, Charles, 41, 171 
Gas warfare, 413 

Gau (district) economic advisers, 329, 397 
Gauleiters, 87, 211, 311-312, 333; edu- 



Index ( 580 

cational level, 121; corruption and life 
style of, 215-217; Speer's difficulties 
with, 218-219, 274, 277, 287, 312- 
315, 343, 394, 396-397; dual function 
and allegiance of, 311-312; two cate- 
gories of, 312; as Reich Defense Com- 
missioners, 312, 314, 379; backed by 
Bormann, against Speer, 313-314, 342- 
343, 397; and demolition of historic 
buildings, 314-315; subordinated to 
military in defense questions, 379; 
Posen conference of, on armaments 
(July 1944), 393; interference in arm- 
aments bureaus by, 396-397, 412; help 
in circumventing scorched earth policy, 
402, 441-442; in charge of evacuation 
of frontline areas, 439, 447^., 448; in 
charge of scorched earth policy, 442, 
446-447; scorched earth powers cur- 
tailed again, 455-456 

Gebhardt, SS Gruppenfiihrer Dr. Karl, 
327, 330-332, 334, 335, 340, 486, 498 

Geilenberg, Edmund (head of munitions 
production), 350 

George VI, King, 108 

George, Heinrich (actor), 257 

George, Stefan (poet), 8, 378 

Gercke, General Rudolf, 191 

German air force: preparations for sub- 
jugation of England, 183; armaments 
rivalry with other services, 183, 200- 
203, 365n., 380; supply of Sixth Army 
at Stalingrad, 249, 250; General Staff, 
249, 281, 283, 286n., 363; Sixth Air 
Corps ("Meister Corps"), 282-283; 
Reich air fleet, 351, 407. See also Air 
raids, German; Bomber planes; Fighter 
planes 

German army: and Blood Purge of 1934, 
52, 396; at Party Rallies, 58, 61, 68; 
armaments rivalry with air force, 183, 
200-203, 365^-, 380; General Staff, 
233, 240, 241, 268, 269, 296, 304, 305, 
459; rival general staffs 242; Sixth 
Army at Stalingrad, 248-250; Seven- 
teenth Army retreat from Caucasus, 
270; efforts to have Hitler appoint a 
Commander in Chief, 271; losses in- 
creased by Hitler's unrealistic decisions, 
304; Fifteenth, in France, 355; Tenth, 
in Italy, 406; in charge of Peenemunde, 
365n.; in plot of July 20, 1944, 379, 
381, 382-388, 390; collapse on eastern 
front, 420-422; disintegration of, 459. 
See also Africa Corps 

German navy: unprepared for war, 166; 
change in command, from Raeder to 
Doenitz, 272; armaments program, 



581 ) Index 



272-274; and Allied invasion, 352, 355. 
See also U-boats 

Germanic Empire, plans for, 70, 138- 
139, 152, 181-182 

Germanic peoples, Hitler's thoughts on, 
94-95, 96 

Gestapo (Secret State Police), 212, 265, 
328-329, 387 

Giessler, Hermann (architect), 143-144, 
170-171, 193, 298 

Gilbert, G. M., 510, 5140. 

Gilkrest, Colonel, 499 

Goebbels, Joseph, Minister of Propa- 
ganda, 60, 91, 109, 122, 128, 129, 291, 
428; as Gauleiter of Berlin 25, 76, 328- 
329; offices and residence renovated, 
26-27; member of Hitler's inner circle, 
30, 35, 92, 120, 295, 426, 473; im- 
presario of Berlin "crystal night," 112; 
report on foreign newsmen's reac- 
tion to Hitler-Stalin pact, 162; warns 
against war, 162; opposes German de- 
vastation of Ukraine, 236-237; advo- 
cates austerity programs, 254-255, 
256-257; wants Foreign Ministry, 257; 
not considered a successor to Hitler, 
276; in events of July 20, 1944, 380- 
387, 388-390; as Reich Commissioner 
for Total Mobilization of Resources for 
War, 389, 396-398; opposes "indus- 
trial self-responsibility," 397; urges use 
of poison gas, 413; and Philharmonic, 
462-463; and news of Roosevelt's 
death, 463-464; designated Chancel- 
lor, 487, 488; mentioned, 36, 96, 106, 
174, 175, 235, 461 

— personal qualities and conduct, 254; the 
party intellectual, 24n., 45; authori- 
tarianism, 26, 27; servility toward Hit- 
ler, 27; a schemer and intriguer, 122, 
123-124, 125-127; marriage problems, 
146, 149-150; suicide plans, 465-466, 
470, 481; during his last days, 481, 

484, 485 

—as a propagandist and demagogue, 17, 
254, 257, 300, 386-387, 497; fosters 
belief in Hitler's modesty, 157; "total 
war" speech of, 256-257; belief in his 
own propaganda, 357; fosters secret 
weapons rumors, 410, 449; Werewolf 
propaganda of, 46gn. 

— quoted: on "Septemberlings," 20; on 
von Neurath, 147-148; on life style of 
Nazi leaders, 2i7n.; on total conscrip- 
tion, 419 

—relations and rivalries with other Nazi 
leaders, 45, 87, 264; ridiculing of rivals, 
122, 123-124, 125-127; with Speer, 



212, 254, 267, 268, 393, 397, 417; rift 
with Goering, 257, 259, 260, 264; 
moves against Bormann and Lammers, 
258-264; accommodation, then alli- 
ance, with Bormann, 267, 397-398 

Goebbels, Magda, 146-148, 149-150, 
466, 481-482 

Goerdeler, Karl Friedrich (Mayor of 
Leipzig and a main member of the 
resistance), 392n., 394n. 

Goering, Reich Marshal Hermann, 109, 
133, 224-225, 236, 259, 488; residence 
renovated, 36-38; in Blood Purge 
(1934), 51, 52; Obersalzberg resident, 
84, 92; warns against war, 162; Hider 
on, 175, 201, 483; Karinhall, 178-179, 
205, 322; and use of forced labor, 202; 
and woman labor, 220-221; head of 
Reich Research Council, 225; at situa- 
tion conferences, 240, 244-245; chair- 
man of Reich Defense Council, 258; 
Goebbels/ Speer group plan to restore 
him, against Bormann, 258-265; leaves 
Berlin, 474-475, 480; attempts succes- 
sion to Hider, is ousted, 482-483, 486; 
champagne breakfast with Patton, 500; 
imprisonment, 502; in Nuremberg, 
507, 511-512; wants to maintain "Hit- 
ler legend," 511-512, 517; in trial, 512, 
514, 519; mentioned, 58, 63, 96, 105, 
174, 217, 268, 288 

—as Commander in Chief of the air force, 
259, 261, 284; discounts enemy bomb- 
ing of Germany, 155; in Stalingrad 
crisis, 248-249, 250; refuses to face 
realities of air warfare, 279-280, 289- 
291; and fuel shortage, 347-348; 
forced to relinquish air armaments 
production, 332, 348-349; his promises 
of air fleet for home defense broken, 
351; curtailment of powers, 450 

—as Commissioner of Four- Year Plan, 
183, 196, 206, 219, 220-221, 259, 275; 
iron allotments, 177; incapable of han- 
dling economic planning, 183-184, 
206; tries to take over Todt's assign- 
ments, 195-196; jurisdictional fights 
with Speer, 199-202, 205-207, 274, 
275 

— corrupt practices of, 124-125, 322-323; 
his art appropriations, 37, 178-179; his 
"looting" in occupied areas, 91, 178- 
179, 322; gift from Adolf Hider Fund, 
265 

—personal qualities and conduct of, 512; 
his ostentation, 36-37, 136-137, 322- 
323; his hunting passion, 97, 168; a 
schemer and intriguer, 126, 199, 265; 



Goering, Reich Marshal Hermann (cont.) 
increasing lethargy, 206, 265-266; 
drug addict, 265, 512; loss of reputa- 
tion, 267, 275, 276; corruptness of, 
322-323; IQ test score, 510 
— quoted: on food and company at Hit- 
ler's table, 119; on Churchill, 165; on 
possible German defeat, 245; on Jew- 
ish survivors, 512 
—relations and rivalry with other Nazi 
leaders, 45, 87; member of Hitler's in- 
ner circle, 35; sycophancy toward Hit- 
ler, 37-38, 295; lauds Speer, 186; rift 
with Goebbels, 257, 259, 260; schemes 
against Speer during illness, 330, 334- 
336, 340, 342-343; and Speer's offer 
of resignation, 338-339; his ties to 
Hitler, 427; calls Speer a "Brutus," 430 
"Gray Eminence" the, 380 
Great Britain. See England 
Greek islands, retreat of German units 

from, 400 
Greeks, Hitler's admiration of, 96-97 
Greenland, planned refuge in, 494-495 
Grohe, Joseph, Gauleiter, 279, 40211. 
Gropius, Walter, 18, 42, 145 
Ground-to-air missile, 364, 365-366 
Griitzner, Eduard (painter), 43-44, 90, 

179 

Guderian, General Heinz, 336, 364; In- 
spector General of Armored Forces, 
234, 275; wants a Commander in Chief 
of army appointed, 270-271; in events 
of July 20, 1944, 386; army chief of 
staff, 416; and Russian offensive of 
early 1945, 416, 420-421, 422; out- 
spokenness with Hitler, 420-421; holds 
war lost; 423; efforts against scorched 
earth policy, 435-436, 450, 518; en- 
forced leave of, 450, 48on.; mentioned, 
383, 425, 427, 444 

Guilt for Nazi crimes, 112-113; Speer's 
acceptance of, 19, 20, 113, 21911., 370, 
375-376, 489, 510-511, 516, 523; col- 
lective, 510, 516; its acceptance by 
leaders urged to relieve people, 513, 
516, 522 

"Guns instead of butter," 120 

Guns, production figures, 210 

Gurtner, Franz, Minister of Justice, 52 



Haase, Major General Paul von (City 
Commandant of Berlin), 385, 386, 388 

Haasemann, Konrad (Personnel Chief in 
Armaments Ministry), 198, 328, 32gn. 

Hacha, Emil, President of Czechoslovakia, 
117 



Index ( 582 

Hadamowsld, Eugen (head of Reich 
Broadcasting), 125-126 

Hahn, Otto, 225 

Haider, General Franz (army Chief of 
Staff), 238, 239-240 

Hamburg: 1943 air raids on, 283-284; 
demolition of port facilities prevented, 
469; surrender without fight, 494 

Hanfstaengl, Eberhard (director of Na- 
tional Gallery, Berlin), 27 

Hanfstaengl, Ernst (foreign press chief), 
126-127 

Haniel (industrialist), 394n. 

Hanke, Karl, State Secretary in Ministry 
of Propaganda, 21, 24, 25-26, 27, 47, 
122, 125-126, 129 145; and Magda 
Goebbels, 146-147, 149-150; on mass 
rally plans, 155-156; reports on Soviet 
military deficiencies, 169, Gauleiter of 
Lower Silesia, 218-219, 313, 333, 423; 
hints at Auschwitz, 375-376 

Hanover, a "reconstruction city," 176 

Hansen, Theophil (architect), 41 

Harris, Sir Arthur, 287 

Harz Mountains, V-2 production plant, 

370-371 

Hassell, Ulrich von, i39n. 

Haupt, Albrecht (art historian), 11 

Haushofer, Karl (geopolitician), 176 

Hausser, SS General Paul, 441, 449 

Haussmann, George E., 75, 76 

Heidelberg, 449 

Heinkel, Ernst (aircraft designer), 362, 
503, 504 

Heinrici, General Gotthardt, 166, 394**., 
435; and battle for Berlin, 467-468, 
469, 476 

Heisenberg, Werner, 225-226, 227, 228 

Helldorf, Count Wolf von (Berlin Police 
Commissioner), 109 

Hellmuth, Gauleiter, 449 

Helmer, Hermann (architect), 41 

Henderson, Sir Neville, quoted, 57n., 59, 
14211. 

Hengl, General, 318 

Henne, Willi (aide of Todt and Speer), 
337 

Herrera, Juan de, 184 

Hess, Rudolf (Deputy Leader of Nazi 
Party), 28, 45, 62, 87, 137; interest in 
urban renewal, 79; thoughts on Hitler 
as a "friend," 100-101; his diet, 119- 
120; flight to England, 174-176; Hitler 
on, 175, 391; characterization of, 175- 
176; in Nuremberg trial, 509, 512; ver- 
dict against, 522; mentioned, 40, 92, 
276 



583 ) Index 

Hettlage, Karl (financial expert, aide to 
Speer), 140, 467 

Hewel, Walter, Ambassador, 97, 180, 
296, 299 

Heydrich, SS Obergruppenfuhrer Rein- 
hard, 373 

Heye, Vice Admiral, 412 

High Command of the Armed Forces 
(OJCW-Oberkommando der Wehr- 
macht), 108, 162, 183, 239, 244, 303; 
planned HQ building for, 151, 156; 
term "Bendlerstrasse" synonymous with, 
38on.; events of July 20 at, 380, 384- 
385, 387-388; mentioned, 235, 238 

High Command of the Army (OHK- 
Oberkommando des Heeres), 136, 145, 
269 

High Command of the Navy, 138, 145 

Himmler, Heinrich, ReichsfUhrer-SS, 35, 
120, 216, 264, 265, 266, 276, 311; 
rivalry with other Nazi leaders, 45, 
87; anti-church, 141; and concentration 
camp labor, 144, 369-370; at situa- 
tion conferences, 240; and conspiracy 
of July 20, 1944, 380, 384, 388; plans 
"suicide squad," 412-413; arrests 
Wernher von Braun, 371-372; plan for 
arrest of, 466; his schemes for his own 
safety, 495-496; suicide of, 501; men- 
tioned, 54, 175, 344, 389, 462, 477, 
480 

— associates of, 373; friend of Bormann, 
314; Dr. Gebhardt, 327, 332, 335 

—offices and functions, 311; Minister of 
the Interior, 311-312; succeeds Fromm 
as commander of Reserve Army, and 
army chief of armaments, 383^, 399; 
replaced as chief of armaments for the 
army, 420; in command of Vistula 
Army Group, 427, 434; slated to take 
over "War Production," 451; plans to 
form government, 486-487, 488; ex- 
cluded from Doenitz government, 493- 
494 

—personality of, 372-373; his mysticism, 
94, 122, 153; a schemer, 126 

— Sneer's experiences with, 264, 265, 266; 
Himmler fails to support Speer's labor 
shift plans, 312-314, 320-321; Himm- 
ler schemes against Speer, 330, 331- 
332, 336, 340, 34m., 342, 343; Himm- 
ler attempts to interfere in armaments 
production, 369-370, 372-374; Himm- 
ler's mysterious visit to Speer, 427-428 

Hindemith, Paul, 462 

Hindenburg, Paul von, Reich President, 
13, 24, 52, 54, 64; death of, 49, 54; 
warning against Italian alliance, 71 



Historic buildings, efforts at saving of, 
314-315, 423 

Hitler, Adolf, 10; in 1932 election cam- 
paign, 23-24; appointed Chancellor, 
25; his office, 34, 113-114; sense of 
political mission, 80, 166, 357; income 
and finances of, 86-87; personal will 
of, 106; political testaments of, 106, 
485, 487n.; security measures, 158- 
159, 217; question of successor to, 276- 
287, 330, 335, 479, 482, 486-488; sui- 
cide plans of, 466, 476, 479-480; deci- 
sion to die in Berlin 474, 479; death 
of, 48711., 488 

—and architecture, 28-31, 39-43, 50, 79- 
80, 115, 132, 133; plans for Berlin, 34, 
73-79, 132-143, 151-160, 172-173 
(see also Berlin); attitude toward archi- 
tects, 40-41, 79-80; his tastes, 41-42, 
171-172; his sketches, 41, 80, 115, 
143; justification of monumentalism, 
55-56, 69-70, 74, 138, 157; Nurem- 
berg plans, 66-69; indifference to 
urban renewal and social aspects of 
architecture, 78-79; plans for Linz, 79, 
99, 143, 298; presses building plans in 
spite of war, 172-173, 176-177, 180- 
181 

— and art: internationalization of art re- 
jected, 14; his tastes, 27, 41, 42, 43- 
44, 130-131, 179; a "frustrated artist," 
40-41, 80; his own sketches and water- 
colors, 41, 115; acceptance of judgment 
of art specialists, 41, 79-80, 179; mu- 
sic, 60, 91, 130; theater, 130; confisca- 
tions and purchases, 178, 179 

— conversation of: monologue habit, 89, 
120, 237, 297; teatime and table talk, 
examples, 94-100, 120-128, 297-298; 
banality and triviality, 90, 94, 120, 
128, 129, 297, 300-301; ridicuhng of 
close associates, 94-95, 96, 97, 122, 
123-127, 143-144; repetitiveness, 120, 
297, 301; various political opinions, 
120-121, 122; see also under "quoted" 
below 

— domestic affairs under, 65-66; apparent 
concern for labor, 35, 57; Kirchen- 
kampf (campaign against churches), 
123; decisions detrimental to economy, 
214, 219, 222, 229; misreading of 
popular moods and needs, 214, 229; 
left to Bormann, 252-253, 258; evacua- 
tion decrees, 438-439, 447n.; disre- 
gard of people's suffering, 438-439, 
440, 447-448, 457 

— foreign affairs under, 65-66, 71-73, 
108-111, 257, 260, 298-299; choice 



Hitler, Adolf (cont.) 

between English or Italian alliance, 
71-72; remilitarization of Rhineland, 
72; Austrian Anschluss, 109; Czech 
partition of 1938, 110-111; meeting 
with Hacha (1939), 115-116; pact with 
Stalin, 161-162; timing of war, 163- 
164; miscalculations at start of war, 
164-166 

— ideology of, 19; national culture, 14; 
appeals to students, 14-16; urban de- 
generation, 15; anti-Semitism, 19, 20, 
98, 111-112; overshadowed by prag- 
matism after seizure of power, 122-123 

— ill health, 103, 105, 106-112; MorelTs 
treatments, 105, 106, 107; insomnia, 
296 

—inner circle of, 35, 38, 40, 45> 84, 92, 
100-101, 117, 128; rivalry, 45-46, 87, 
124-127, 252-268; his authoritarian- 
ism with, 27, 82; sycophancy, 83; 
closest (Du) "friends," 101; low edu- 
cational and intellectual level of, 121- 
122; during war, 295, 296; during last 
weeks, 426, 472-473 

— as military leader, 230-251, 302-306; 
assumes post of Commander in Chief 
of Armed Forces, 107, 271; claims 
credit for victory over France, 169- 
170; miscalculations in Russia, 183, 
185, 304-305; plans air war on En- 
gland, 183, 229; blunders, 229, 230, 
234-235, 269-270, 283; arms confer- 
ences, 231-236; his technical knowl- 
edge, 231-233; 1942 offensive in 
Russia, 236, 237-239; relations with 
generals, 237, 239-240, 243-244, 305, 
390; his World War I "trench" per- 
spective, 223-233, 241, 305, 319, 399; 
plans drive through Caucausus into 
Asia, 238-239; situation conferences, 
240-245, 302-303, 305-306, 437-439, 
459-460, 480-481; opposing views not 
tolerated, 241, 243-244, 303, 362, 420- 
421; disinterested in air warfare, 242, 
281, 299-300; and naval warfare, 242; 
Stalingrad blunder, 247-251; orders 
German POW mail from Russia de- 
stroyed, 25on.; "Operation Citadel," 
268-269; acts as his own Commander 
in Chief of army, 271, 304; misplaced 
emphasis on tanks, and heavy weapons, 
273, 319, 351, 368; refusal to face 
realities of air warfare, 283-284, 288- 
289, 363-364, 407-409; ignorance of 
logistics, 296; misplaced emphasis on 
bomber vs. fighter planes, 299, 363- 
364; decisions made in a vacuum, 303- 



Index ( 584 

304, 445, 459; miscalculations about 
Normandy invasion, 352-356; "scorched 
earth" orders, 403, 435-436, 44*, 45i, 
453, 455-456n., 460, 471; opposes gas 
warfare, 413-414; Ardennes offensive, 
415, 416, 417, 418; senseless orders of 
last months, examples of, 420-421, 435, 
438-439; question of defense empha- 
sis (west or east?), 422, 481; "war 
games" of last weeks, 459-460 

—his mode of government and decision- 
making, 25, 83, 207, 210, 230, 292- 
294, 298-299; authoritarianism, 19, 82, 
202, 207, 213; distrust of bureaucrats, 
63, 202, 297; intuitive decision-making, 
85, 165, 230; bent for amateurishness, 
104, 197, 227, 230-231; growing iso- 
lation and inaccessibility, 192, 293, 
294, 302; nonspecialists favored, in ap- 
pointments, 197-198; principle of 
"negative selection," 198; avoidance of 
clear lines of jurisdiction, 202, 207, 
210, 242, 312; principle of dividing 
power, 210, 242, 253, 312; failure to 
delegate work, 294; through "Commit- 
tee of Three," 252-253; Bormann's in- 
fluence, 253; party vs. government 
hierarchy, 312, 313; decisions made in 
a vacuum, 303 

— people's attitudes toward: servility of 
subordinates, 27, 37-38, 83, 295; early 
popularity, 34, 40, 48, 65-66, 295; 
changes in, 147, 158, 295; military 
entourage, 239, 295 

— personal manner and attitudes, 92; cal- 
culated to fit given situations, 15-16, 
23, 30, 97; simplicity, naturalness, 
modesty, 30, 48, 157; toward women, 
92-93, 129-130, 150, 472; toward 
children, 93-94; toward his dog, 300, 
301-302 

—personal qualities and characteristics: 
a demagogue, 15-17, 62; hypnotic per- 
suasiveness, 16, 18, 19; personal mag- 
netism, 17-18, 295, 342; basic early 
geniality, 30, 83-84; memory for de- 
tail, 3& 40, 75, 79, 115, 171, 231; 
contradictions in his nature and think- 
ing, 42, 165, 168, 173; superstitious- 
ness, 49; inability to make human con- 
tacts, 83, 100-101; changes in, 83-84, 
85, 156, 158, 241, 292-296, 305; self- 
control, 97, 355, 357; hysterical out- 
breaks, 97-98; losses of temper, 97- 
98, 305, 407-408; growth of self- 
assurance, as shown in his art attempts, 
115; pragmatism, 122, 123; lack of 
humor, 123; no match for methodical 



585 ) Index 

scheming of his associates, 126; mega- 
lomania, as shown in building plans, 
138, 156-157; growing irritability, 165, 
167, 294; megalomania openly shown, 
180; growing suspiciousness and dis- 
trust, 192, 296, 305; apathy, onset of, 
241, 294; his belief in himself, 243, 
292, 304-306, 357-358; self-delusion 
on question of victory, 292-293, 302, 
357; question of insanity, 357, 481; 
during last weeks and days, 471-474, 
479-480, 482-483 

— political program of, 19, 106-107, 522; 
Germanic empire, 70, 138-139, 152, 
181-182; theory of its change dis- 
counted, but acceleration suggested, 
107; world domination, i6on., 182 

— quoted: on bureaucracy, 35; on the 
monarchy, 55, 110; on imperial goals, 
70, 138; on relations with England, 71, 
72; on remilitarization of Rhineland, 
72; on his building plans for Berlin, 74, 
75, 138, 140-141, 155, 157, 198; on 
women, and his bachelorhood, 92; on 
Himmler's mysticism, 94; on the 
church, 95, 123; on various religions, 
96; on Rosenberg's Myth, 96; on physi- 
cal beauty and fitness, 96-97; on his 
youth, 98, 124; on his retirement, 99- 
100, 297; comparisons of German to 
U.S. methods, 107; on durability of 
architecture, 114, 115; on early death 
expectation, 106; on his intellectual de- 
velopment, 120; on propaganda for 
war atmosphere, 148; on war with 
Western powers, 164, 165; on Russian 
campaign, 173, 180; on Goering, 175, 
201, 483; on Hess, 175, 391; on French 
"degenerate" art, 184; "victory is cer- 
tain" speeches, 214, 246-247; on labor 
problem, 219; nothing is "impossible," 
223, 224; on destruction of England, 
227; on losing war by blunders, 229; 
on tanks, 233; on Allied North Africa 
invasion force, 246; on Stalingrad 
crisis, 247, 248, 249; on Ribbentrop, 
257; on bombing of London, 284; 
"there is no turning back," 293; berate- 
ment of General Staff, 305-306, 390; 
on postwar economic initiative and 
progress, 359-360; on Germany's de- 
mise if war were lost, 360, 393, 440; 
on V-2 rocket, 368; on traitors of July 
20, 1944, 390-391, 393; on Ardennes 
offensive, 415, 416; last radio address, 
426; on misuse of governmental 
power, from Mein Kampf, 429; on "fu- 
ture belongs to the stronger eastern 



nation," 440; lack of sympathy for peo- 
ple shown, 440, 456-457 

— his residences: in Berlin, 28-30, 117- 
119, Berghof, 85-86, 88-89, 90 

— speeches of, 60, 62, 130; 1930 speech 
to students described, 15-16; prepara- 
tion, 88; to industrialists (June 26, 
1944), 358-361 

— style and way of life of: meals as social 
hours, 35-36, 88-89, 94-100, 117-129, 
296-298; daily movies, 36, 90-91, 129; 
late hours, 44, 91, 129, 132, 296; in- 
creasing isolation 83, 85, 158-159, 
293, 294; at Obersalzberg, 88-92, 94; 
food, 89, 104, 119, 128-129, 301; ba- 
nality and boredom, 90-91, 94, 120, 
128-129, 297-298, 300-301; his dress, 
110, 297n.; at Chancellery, 117-120, 
128-131; image of modesty and sim- 
plicity maintained, 157, 169; during 
war, 215, 237, 245, 293-302; his spe- 
cial train, 245 

—work habits, 35; speech preparation, 88; 
staccato method, 131, 239; change due 
to war pressures, 293-294 

—writings of: Mein Kampf, 19, 122, 429, 
509; second book, 86 

Hitler, wie ihn keiner kennt (The Hitler 
Nobody Knows, Hoffman), 83-84 

Hofer, Franz, Gauleiter, 308 

Hoffman, Albert, Gauleiter, 447 

Hoffmann, Heinrich (Hitler's photog- 
rapher), 35, 40, 43-44, 5i, 66, 87, 128, 
179, 184, 226, 498; Hitler, wie ihn 
keiner kennt, 83-84; introduces Dr. 
Morell to Hitler, 104 

Hoffmann, Ludwig (architect), 6 

Holderlin, Friedrich (poet), quoted, 378 

Holland: harnessing of industries of, and 
forced labor stopped, 310, 311; 
scorched earth policy circumvented, 
402n., 457, 496; Hitler plans flooding 
of, 457 

Home Army, Operation Valkyrie, 378, 
381, 388 

Homefront: Allied vs. German, com- 
pared, 214-215, 221; Speer's pleas for 
mobilization of, 215-216; 220-221, 
255-256, 312-313, 381; austerity pro- 
grams, 255-256, 257-258. See also 
Antiaircraft defense 

Horcher's Restaurant incident, 257, 259, 
260 

Horthy, Admiral Miklos, Regent of Hun- 
gary, 333, 507 

Hossbach, Colonel Friedrich, 61 

House of German Art, Munich, 39, 49 



Hugenberg, Alfred (head of German Na- 
tionalist Party), 27 

Hungary: Hitler's takeover of, 333-334; 
Speer's visit to prevent demolitions in, 

434 
Hupfauer, Theodor (political deputy to 

Speer), 428, 458, 466 
Hydroelectric plants, Ruhr, bombing of, 

280-281 
Hydrogenation plants, 351, 407 



Ibsen, Henrik, 9 

Ideology, Nazi, 14-15, 19; held incapable 
by Hitler of replacing religion, 95-96; 
overshadowed by pragmatism after 
takeover of power, 122-123 

Ihne, Ernst von (architect), 42 

Index Figures for German Armaments 
End-Products, 210 

Industrial self-responsibility, principle of, 
25n., 208-209, 211, 329, 397, 42on. 

Industry and industrialists: Adolf Hitler 
Endowment Fund of, 87, 265; and 
armaments production, 200-201, 202, 
208, 213, 274; protected by Speer from 
Nazi party, 202-203, 321, 329, 359; 
protected from Gestapo, 212, 321, 
394n.; air raids on, 284-286, 332, 346- 
350, 377, 406; Hitler's fear of, as spark 
to communism, 309; Nazi party inter- 
ference, 329, 359, 396-397, 412; pleads 
for Speer not to resign, 339; "scorched 
earth" policy, 339, 360, 400-404, 442, 
455-456; fear of postwar state-social- 
ism and nationalization, 359; Hitler's 
speech to, of June 26, 1944, 359~36i; 
Speer's efforts to prevent demolition of, 
400-405, 421, 433-436, 442, 446-450, 
456, 457, 458n., 461, 467, 469. See 
also Armaments; Consumer goods; and 
specific industries, i.e. Aircraft, Chemi- 
cal, etc, 

"Industry Organization," 209, 220, 424 

Infantry weapons production, 319 

Inflation of 1923/24, 9-10 

Invasion of Normandy, 354-355, 356, 
359, 400, 401; loss °f German home- 
front fighter planes in, 351; Hitler's 
miscalculations, 352-356 

Invasion on German North Sea Coast, 
fear of, 377-378 

Islam, Hitler on, 96 

Italy: Hitler's distrust of, 71, 121; inva- 
sion of Abyssinia, 71; League of Na- 
tions sanctions against, 71-72; German 
alliance with, 71-72; Hitler's 1938 trip 
to, 109-110; Speer's trip through, 146- 



Index ( 586 

148; reneges on attack on Poland, 164; 
collapse of Fascist regime, 307; Hitler's 
takeover in, 308; forced labor stopped, 
311; Speer's effort to save historic 
buildings, 3i5n.; question of German 
withdrawal from, 405 

Jackson, Robert H., 513, 514, 517 

Janicke, General Erwin, 270 

Jannings, Emil (actor), 36, 91 

Japan: remarks on, by Hitler, 96, 121, 
175; sphere of interest, 180 

Jeans, Sir James, quoted, 24 

Jehovah's Witnesses, persecution of, 33 

Jeschonnek, General Hans, 281, 291 

Jet planes: Me-262, 362-364; all-wing, 
364; "people's fighter," 412; plan for 
long-range bomber, 425 

Jews: Speer's attitudes toward, 19-20; 
persecution of, 33, 111-112, 519, 523; 
rarely mentioned by Hitler, 94, 112; 
Nazi looting of art collections of, 178; 
Jewish physicists' research suspect, 228; 
blamed by Hitler for air raids, 299; 
Speer calls for safe release of, 469 

Jodl, General Alfred, 364, 377-378, 469; 
relations with Hitler, 239, 244; at situ- 
ation conferences, 240, 242, 244, 303; 
chief of Wehrmacht Operations Staff, 
242, 303; his diary, 26gn., 378; on 
Fascist collapse in Italy, 307; and 
German-British accommodation on Sa- 
lonika, 400; advocates withdrawal from 
occupied territories, 405-406; prepares 
for Ardennes offensive, 406; and efforts 
to prevent demolition, 435, 458, 518; 
imprisonment, 501; in Nuremberg trial, 
515; mentioned, 173, *45, 4*7, 476, 
478, 479, 480, 495 

Ju 88 Program, 182 

Juttner, SS Obergruppenfuhrer, Hans, 
373, 42on. 

Kaiser Wilhelm Gesellschaf t, 225 
Kaltenbrunner, SS Obergruppenfuhrer 
Ernst, Chief of Gestapo, 212, 387-388, 
424, 428; July 20 plot investigations, 

387, 391-392, 395 
Kammler, SS Gruppenfuhrer Hans, 373- 

374, 45o 
Kampfbund Deutscher Kultur (League of 

Struggle for German Culture), 18, 64 
Karinhall (Goering's estate), 178-179, 

205, 217, 225, 322 
Kaspar, Hermann (painter), 145, 146 
Kaufmann, Karl Otto, Gauleiter, 283, 

3i3n., 343, 457, 466, 469, 488; helps 

Speer with plans for radio speech, 475- 



587 ) Index 

476, 486, 488; surrender of Hamburg, 

494 

Keaton, Buster, 36 

Keitel, Field Marshal Wilhelm, Chief of 
Staff of Armed Forces, 107, 108, 162, 
183, 216, 235; relations with Hitler, 

239, 243-244; at situation conferences, 

240, 242, 243-244; a "yes" man, 243- 
244, 295, 320-321; in Stalingrad crisis, 
250; member of "Committee of Three," 
252, 263, 271; and fuel shortage, 346- 
348; and assassination attempt on Hit- 
ler, 389; and poison gas, 414; and ef- 
forts to prevent demolition, 435, 457, 
460; evacuation decree drafted by, 
438-439; supreme commander of armed 
forces, 48on.; plans to join Himmler 
government, 486, 487, 488; signs Ger- 
man surrender, 497; imprisonment, 498, 
508; in Nuremberg trial, 514-515, 519, 
mentioned, 173, 237, 256, 264, 269, 
296, 378, 397, 419, 427, 444, 473, 476, 
495, 496 

Kempff, Wilhelm, 145 

Kemptka, Erich (Hitler's driver), 439, 440, 

443, 444 
Kerrl, Hans, Minister of Church Affairs, 

67 

Kesselring, Field Marshal Albert, 244; 
Commander-in-Chief on Western front, 
438, 440-441, 448, 459; carries out 
demolition order, 440, 502; imprison- 
ment, 502 

Kessler (special commissioner for ball- 
bearing production), 286 

Kiev, Speer's visit to, 236 

Kinzl, General Eberhard, 496 

Kirchenkampf, 123. See also Churches 

Kleiber, Erich (conductor), 9 

Klessheim Palace (near Salzburg), 217, 
218, 333-335 

Klopfer, Gerhard, State Secretary, 276n., 
329, 458, 466 

Kluge, Field Marshal Hans Gunther von, 

271, 394-395 

Koch, Erich, Gauleiter, 496; Reich Com- 
missar for the Ukraine, 236, 26911. 

Koch, Dr. Friedrich, 330-331, 33*, 333, 
334n«, 335, 340 

Koller, General Karl (air force Chief of 
Staff), 480 

Kollwitz, Kathe, 422 

Konigsberg art gallery, 178 

Konigswusterhausen radio station, 469 

Korner, Billy, State Secretary in Air Min- 
istry, 201, 221, 258 

Korten, General Giinter (air force Chief 
of Staff), 282-283 



Kransberg Castle, 504; Nazi leaders' im- 
prisonment in, 504-506, 512 

Krauch, C. (industrialist and commission- 
er for chemical production), 347, 365n. 

Krebs, General Hans (army Chief of 
Staff), 458, 459, 480-481 

Kreipe, General (air force Chief of Staff), 

364 
Kreis, Wilhelm (architect), 135, 145, 146 
Krenkler, Professor Daniel, 11 
Krupp Works, 227 
Kuban bridgehead, 270 

Labor: Hitler's apparent concern for, 35, 
57; expansion of forces, during 1942- 
1944, 210; homefront, Allied attitude 
compared to Germany, 214-215; war- 
time shortage, 217-221, 255, 269, 312; 
German women as, 220-221, 320; em- 
ployed in consumer goods industries, 
274, 312; program for 1944, conference 
with Hitler, 320-321; shifted to repair 
fuel plants, 351; for V-2 project, 368, 
369, 370-371. See also Forced labor 

Labor Front, 57, 58, 142 

Lammers, Hans, Reich Minister and chief 
of Reich Chancery, 177, 264, 320, 344; 
as State Secretary, 34, 35, 76; mem- 
ber of "Committee of Three," 252, 256, 
271; in charge of austerity programs, 
256-257; presides over Cabinet, 256; 
Goebbels/Speer group moves against 
him, 258-260; role in placing all war 
production under Speer, 274-275 

Lange, Hans (auctioneer), 179 

Lapland: Speer's visit to, 318-320; ques- 
tion of German withdrawal from, 405- 
406 

Lauterbacher, Hartmann (Hitler Youth 
functionary), 124 

Laval, Pierre, 310, 311 

Lawrence, Lord Geoffrey, 522 

League of Nations sanctions against Italy, 
71-72 

League of Struggle for German Culture 
(Kampfbund Deutscher Kultur), 18, 64 

Le Courbusier, Charles, 236 

Ledoux, Claude Nicholas, 154 

Leeb, General Wilhelm von, 200, 288 

Leibbrand (Ministerial Director in Minis- 
try of Transportation), 77 , 223 

Lenard, Philipp (physicist), 228 

Leuna Works, 346, 350 

Ley, Robert, Reichsleiter and head of 
German Labor Front, 57, 142, 212, 
216, 217, 336, 39on.; rivalry with other 
Nazi leaders, 87, 175; in charge of 
Nazi education, 122; Giessler taper- 



Ley, Robert (cont.) 

sonation of, 143-144; allied with Goeb- 
bels's group against Bormann, 254, 
258, 263, 264; member of Hitler's in- 
ner circle, 295, 426, 473; wishes to 
succeed Speer, 336; in charge of medi- 
cal conditions at Central Works (forced 
labor camps), 371; on poison gas, 413; 
"Death Rays" and other crackpot 
notions, 464-465; plan for arrest of, 
466; suicide of, 50911. 

Liebel, Willy: Mayor of Nuremberg, 66- 
67; department head in Armaments 
Ministry, 20911., 336, 34m-, 403 

Lindemann, General Fritz, 379, 383 

Linz: building plans for, 79, 99, 143, 
148, 176, 298; art collection for, 177- 
178, 179; Hitler's love of, 98-99, 297- 
298; armaments conference of June 
1944 in, 358-359 

Lippert, Julius, Mayor of Berlin, 73 

Lisbon, Speer in, 184 

Lissitzky, El, 236 

Liszt, Franz, Les Preludes, 180 

Lohse, Gauleiter, 496 

London, 81, 108; bombing of, 283, 284; 
V-i attacks on, 355-356 

Lorenz, Heinz (press secretary, Ministry 
of Propaganda), 298, 426 

Lorraine ore mines, 401-402 

Louvre art collection, Hitler's plans for, 
178 

Ludwig II, King of Bavaria, 141 

Luftwaffe. See German air force 

Luschen, Friedrich (industrialist and 
head of German electric industry), 429, 
464, 469, 476, 477, 478, 484 

Luxembourg, "scorched earth" policy cir- 
cumvented, 40211. 

Machler, Martin (architect), 74n. 

Mafalda, Princess of Hesse, 307 

Mahler, Gustav, 9 

Maikop oil fields, taken by Germans, 238 

Maillol, Aristide, 145 

Manfred- Weiss works, 373 

Manganese resources, and defense of 

Nikopol, 315-316 
Manstein, Field Marshall Fritz Erich 

von, 269, 271 
March, Otto (architect), 80 
Marchfield, Nuremberg, 67 
Mass rallies, 155-156, 295. See also 

Nuremberg Party Rallies 
May, Ernst (architect), 236 
May Day rallies: of 1933, 26-27; site, 

155 
Mechnikov, Ilya, 104-105 



Index ( 588 

Mein Kampf (Hitler), 19, 122, 509; 
quoted, 429 

Meindl (industrialist), 335-336 

Meinen (industrialist), 39411. 

Meissner, Otto, State Secretary in the 
Chancery, 64, 151 

Meister, Major General Rudolf, and 
"Meister Corps," 282-283 

Mendelsohn, Erich (architect), 18 

Meran, Italy, Speer's convalescence at, 
335, 34on. 

Merker, Otto (engineer), 273 

Messerschmitt, Willy (aircraft designer), 
4^5 

Me-262 jet fighter plane, 362-364, 445 

Meyer, Gauleiter, 182 

Meyer (industrialist), 39411. 

Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig, 18, 145 

Milch, Field Marshal Erhard (State Sec- 
retary in Air Ministry, and armaments 
chief of the air force), 183, 199, 200- 
201, 205, 208, 215, 221, 224, 225; and 
aircraft production priorities, 183, 289, 

299, 362; Speer's good relations with, 
203, 244, 265, 275, 276, 336, 339; in 
Stalingrad crisis, 249, 250; allied with 
Goebbels/Speer group against Bor- 
mann, 258, 259, 264, 265; witness to 
Goering's corruptness, 322-323; pro- 
poses "Fighter Aircraft Staff," 332- 
333; and rocket development, 367; 
mentioned, 279, 282, 291, 347, 422, 
461-462 

Minesweeper production, 273 

"Miracle" weapons. See Secret weapons 

Missiles. See Rockets 

Mitford, Lady Unity, 40 

Model, Field Marshal Walther, 364, 435, 
442, 444, 445, 448, 458; commands 
Ardennes offensive, 416-417 

Mohammedanism, Hitler on, 96 

Mohne Valley dam, bombing of, 280-281 

Molotov, Vyacheslav M., 179 

Monarchy, Hitler on, 55, 110 

Mondorf, Luxembourg, Nazi leaders' im- 
prisonment in, 502 

Montgomery, Field Marshal Bernard 
Law, 496 

Morrell, Dr. Theodor, 104-106, 107, 116, 

300, 33m. 

Morgenthau Plan for defeated Germany, 

433 
Moscow, 81, 155 

Moscow trials of 1937, Hitler on, 390 
Mosley, Sir Oswald, 122 
"Mouse" tank, 234 
Movies, Hitler's taste in, 36, 90-91 
Muller, Ludwig, Reich Bishop, 95 



589 ) Index 

Munch, Edvard, 27 

Munich, 39-46, 143; Fuehrer House, 39, 
43; House of German Art, 39, 49; re- 
newal plans for, 79, 176; Hitler's good 
memories of his years in, 98; Sudeten- 
land surrender, 111, 164 

Music: Speer's taste, 8-9; Hitler and, 
60, 91, 130 

Mussert, Anton, 122 

Mussolini, Benito ("Duce"), 71, 110, 142, 
178; consents to Austrian Anschluss, 
109; reneges on attack on Poland, 164; 
liberation of, 308, 387 

Mustard gas, 4131*., 4*4 

Mysticism, 153; Hitler on, 94, 95 

Myth of the Twentieth Century (Rosen- 
berg), 19, 95, 96 



Nagel, Will (Nazi party functionary), 23, 
24, 167 

Naples, Goering's art confiscations, 179 

Napoleon Bonaparte, 76, 135, 368; Hitler 
at tomb, 172 

National Socialist German Workers' 
Party (NSDAP), 21; 1930 Reichstag 
election gain of, 14; ideology, 14-15, 
19, 95-96, 122-123; appeal to students, 
14-16; Speer's membership in, 17-20, 
177; "Septemberlings," 20; low cul- 
tural level of membership of, 25; lead- 
ership training, 2<>n., 122-123; rela- 
tionships of "old comrades," 44-45; 
rivalry of leaders after 1933, 45-46, 
87; elimination of left wing in Roehm 
putsch, 53; low intellectual and educa- 
tional level of leaders, 60, 121; rem- 
nants of revolutionary, anticapitalist 
wing, 61; Amtswalter, 58; Gauleiters 
and Reichsleiters, 87, 121, 215-216, 
311-312; and churches, 95-96, 123; 
critical of Speer, 211-212; corruption 
and life style of leadership, 215-217, 
225, 256, 322-323; dual function of 
Gauleiters, 312; interference in Speer's 
Ministry, 328-329; interference in in- 
dustry and private enterprise, 329, 359, 
396-397; Hitler's authority waning, 
298. See also Nuremberg Party Rallies 

Naumann, Friedrich (theologian and so- 
cial scientist), 8 

Naumann, Werner, State Secretary in 
Ministry of Propaganda, 272, 328, 419, 
428, 461, 462 

Naval armaments, 166, 271-274; highest 
priority, 272; taken over by Speer, 273 

Naval base system, Hitler's plans for, 
181-182 



Naval warfare, 242, 272. See also U-boats 

Nazi parties outside Germany, 122 

Nazi Party. See National Socialist Ger- 
man Workers' Party 

Neoclassicism, 42, 62, 81, 136 

Neo-Empire Style, 160 

Netherlands, the. See Holland 

Neumann, Erich, Ministerial Director for 
Four- Year Plan, 205 

Neurath, Baron Konstanin von, Foreign 
Minister, 82, 107, 108; dismissal, 107; 
Reich Protector of Bohemia and Mo- 
ravia, 147-148; in Nuremberg trial, 
513 

"New cities" program, 182 

Nickel resources, 316, 319, 405 

Niemoller, Pastor Martin, 98, 498, 504 

Nietzsche house, Weimar, 64 

Nikopol, defense of, 315-316 

Nimitz, Admiral Chester W., 515, 52on. 

Nitrogen plants, 348 

Nitze, Paul, 499 

Nolde, Emil (painter), 27 

Normandy. See Invasion of Normandy 

North Africa, Allied landing in, 215, 
245-246 

Norway: plans for German naval base 
and city in, 181-182; question of Ger- 
man withdrawal from, 405; prevention 
of demolitions in, 495-496 

NSDAP (Nationalsozialistische Deutsche 
Arbeiterpartei). See National Socialist 
German Workers' Party 

Nuclear research: German, 225-229; 
American, 226, 22811., 229 

Null, Eduard van der (architect), 41 

Nuremberg: Zeppelin Field design, 55, 
56; Kongresshalle, 59, 69; Marchfield, 
67; Great Studium, 68; building pro- 
gram pressed in spite of war, 176-177, 
181; air raid on, 263 

Nuremberg Diary (Gilbert), 5i4n. 

Nuremberg Party Rallies, 58, 59-61, 88, 
130; of 1933, Speer 's design for, 27-28; 
architectural plans for, 55, 62, 64, 66- 
70, 144; use of searchlights, 58-59; 
movies of, 61-62; of 1938, 110 

Nuremberg Trial, 178, 293, 370, 416, 
430, 512-524; indictments, 375, 510, 
514; verdict against Speer, 40 m., 523; 
imprisonment, 507-512; pre-trial inter- 
rogations, 508-509, 511; Speer's views 
of, 510-511, 513, 5i6, 5i7n., 522; 
other defendants' views of, 511-512; 
prosecutor's opening statement, 513; 
presentation of evidence, 513; daily 
schedule, 513-514; defense, 514-518; 
Speer's defense, 515-517; cross-exami- 



Nuremberg Trial (cont.) 

nation of Speer, 517-518; closing 
speeches, 519-521; verdicts and sen- 
tencing, 522-523 

Obersalzberg, 46-48, 84-92, 293; Hitler's 
first house on, 46; walking tours, 47- 
48, 49; Bormann's construction on, 84- 
85, 93; Berghof described, 85-86, 
88-89, 90; daily routine, 88-92; tea- 
house and teatime at, 89, 94~95; table 
talk, 94-100; construction continued 
despite war, 215-216; bunker, 217; 
wartime stays at, 294 

Observer, The, on Speer, 344-345 

Obtigkeitsstaat, 33 

Ocean-liner style of decor, 26, 137 

Ohlendorf, SS Obergruppenfuhrer Otto, 
Chief of Security Service, 329, 458, 
498 

Ohnesorge, Wilhelm, Minister of Post 
Office, 87, 227 

OKH. See High Command of the Army 

OKW, 235. See also High Command of 
the Armed Forces 

Olbrich, Joseph M. (architect), 42 

Olbricht, General Friedrich, 205, 379, 
382n., 383, 385; executed, 388 

Olympic Games of 1936, 70, 72-73, 80 

Olympic Stadium, Berlin, 80 

Omaha Beach, 353 

"One-dish" Sundays, 120 

One-man submarine, 412 

One-party system, 152 

"Operation Citadel," 268-269 

Optical industry, 279 

Ordensburgen (Nazi training schools), 
25n., 122-123 

Organization methods, Speer's, 204-213 

Oshima, Hiroshi (Japanese Ambassador), 
420 

Owens, Jesse, 73 

Painting(s): modern, branded as "degen- 
erate," 27, 184; Hitler's taste, 27, 42, 
43-44, 179; confiscations in occupied 
areas, 178-179; Munich School, 179 
Panther tank, 234 
Panzer IV tank, 233, 241 
Panzerfaust (tank destroyer), 413 
Papen, Franz von, Vice Chancellor, 53; 

in Nuremberg trial, 519 
Paris: Opera, 41, 171-172; Hitler's ad- 
miration of architecture of, 41, 75, 76, 
171-172; World's Fair of 1937, 67, 81; 
Champs Elysees, 76, 135, 172; Ajtc de 
Triomphe, 76, 135, 172; neoclassicist 



Index ( 590 

buildings, 81; Hitler's tour of, 170- 
172; Hitler considers destruction of, 
172-173 

Parkamentarianism, Speer's use of, 211 

Party Rallies. See Nuremberg Party 
Rallies 

Patria, S.S., 495, 497 

Patton, General George S., 438, 500 

Paul, Bruno (architect), 42 

Peenemiinde rocket site, 167, 228, 365, 
366-367 

People's Court, 445 

"People's fighter," 412 

People's grenadier divisions, 399 

Perret, August, 81 

Persecution, groups affected, 33 

Persia, Hitler plans drive into, 238, 270 

Petain government, 246 

Pfundtner, Hans, State Secretary in Min- 
istry of the Interior, 80 

Philip, Prince of Hesse, 307 

Plagemann (superintendent of Reich Air 
Ministry), 322 

Pleiger, Paul (industrialist and Reich 
Commissioner for Coal), 347, 373 

Ploesti oil fields, bombing of, 348 

Poelaert, Joseph (architect), 42 

Poelzig, Hans (architect), 11, 14, 18 

Pohl, SS. Obergruppenfuhrer Oswald, 373 

Poison gas, 413-414 

Poland: German attack delayed, 164; 
campaign in, 166; partition of (1939), 
168 

Political naivete of Germans: causes of, 
7~-8 t 19; rooted in authoritarian tradi- 
tion, 8, 33; mental apathy, 19, 20, 33; 
fostered by Nazi emphasis on profes- 
sionalism and specialization, 33, 112- 

113 

Popitz, Johannes, Prussian Minister of 
Finance, 380 

Population projections, 152 

Porsche, Ferdinand, 505; tanks, 234, 268 

Poschmann, Dr. (medical supervisor in 
Armaments Ministry), 371 

Poser, Lieutenant Colonel Manfred von 
(Speer's liaison officer to General Staff), 
418, 423, 425, 440, 45o, 459, 463, 468, 
469, 475, 477, 478 

Posse, Hans (director of Dresden Art 
Gallery), 179 

POW's: German, in Russia, mail ordered 
destroyed by Hitler, 25on.; Russian, 
SS plan for liquidation of, 268-269; 
Russian, in German armaments produc- 
tion, 269, 374, 522; Speer calls for safe 
release of, 469 

Praun, General Albert, 451, 458, 460 



5Qi ) Index 

"Preservation of our victory" decree, 173, 
177 

Professional organizations, 33 

Propaganda Ministry, 155-156; renova- 
tions of, 26; ruses used near war's end, 
410-411 

Pseudoreligionism, 122, 153. See also 
Mysticism 

PT-boat production, 273 

Public opinion and morale: adulation of 
Hitler during early years of his regime, 
34, 40, 48, 65-66, 295; spontaneity of 
cheering crowds, 148-149, 158; pre- 
war lowering of morale, 147, 158, 163; 
lack of war enthusiasm, 166-167; con- 
cessions to maintain morale of people, 
214; Hitler's misreadings of, 214, 299; 
readiness to forego luxuries, 255, 257; 
not weakened by bombing, 278; Hit- 
ler's magnetism faded, 295; hope set 
in "secret weapons," 409-410, 446; 
near war's end, 410-411, 438, 448- 
449, 450* See also Political naivete of 
Germans 

Public utilities, Speer's efforts to prevent 
demolition of facilities, 436, 442, 448, 

449, 457 
Putsch of 1923, anniversary celebrations, 

44 
Putsch of 1934. See Roehm putsch 
Putsch of July 20, 1944, 212, 305, 379- 
389; members of, 379; Speer's possible 
implication in, 381, 389, 391-393, 395; 
failure to take charge of communica- 
tions center, 384, 386, 388; crushing 
of, 385-389; Hitler's reaction to, 389- 
391; plans for post-Hitler government, 
39^-393; persecutions and executions, 
387, 388, 390-391, 394-395 
Puttkamer, Captain Karl-Jesko von (navy 
adjutant of Hitler), 162 



Racial notions: Speer's personal views, 
11, 19-20; Hitler's, of Negroes, 73; 
Hitler's, of Arabs, 96; Hitler's, of "yel- 
low race," 121. See also Anti-Semitism 

Raeder, Grand Admiral Erich, 107, 181; 
replaced as Commander in Chief of the 
navy, 272; Nuremberg trial verdict, 522 

Raginsky, General, 518 

Railroads, 222-224; in Russia, 184-186, 
190-191, 223; Nazi leaders' private 
trains, 216, 225, 245; transcontinental, 
Hitler's plans for, 300-301; coal short- 
age, 414; Speer's efforts to prevent de- 
molition, 435-437, 441, 442, 468; 
"scorched earth" orders, 453, 456n. 



Rainer, Friedrich, Gauleiter, 308 

Rallies. See Mass rallies; May Day ral- 
lies; Nuremberg Party Rallies 

Rastenburg, Hitler's HQ at, 191, 294n., 
307, 381; bunker at, 217, 391 

Rathenau, Walther, 208, 210 

Rearmament, German: vs. Allied, com- 
parison, 163; naval, lagging, 166 

"Reconstruction cities," 176 

Refugees, 403-404, 4*3, 435, 493, 495». 

Regensburg, air raid on, 285 

Reich air fleet, 351, 407 

Reich Defense Commissioners, 312, 314, 
379, 455 

Reich Defense Council, 258, 259, 260, 
263, 264 

Reich Research Council, 225 

Reichsbahn, 222-223. See also Railroads 

Reichsleiters, 87, 312; educational level 
of, 121; corruption and life style of, 
215-217 

Reichstag: elections of 1930, 14; build- 
ing, 151-152 

Reinhardt, Max, 11 

Relativity, theory of, 228 

Religion, Hitler's thoughts on, 95-96 

Remagen bridge, 435, 444 

Remer, tyajor Otto Ernst, 385-386, 387 

Reusch (industrialist), 212, 394n. 

Reuter (industrialist), 394n. 

Reymann, General Helmuth (command- 
ant of Berlin), 467-468 

Rhine: bridges, danger of bombing of, 
377; crossed by British troops, 445 

Rhineland, German remilitarization of 
(1936), 72 

Ribbentrop, Joachim von, Foreign Min- 
ister, 87, 97, 107, 109, 180, 423, 482, 
483-484; as Ambassador to London, 
108-109; ostentation of, 108, 169; ex- 
ponent of war, 162, 163; concludes 
friendship treaty with Stalin, 168; at 
situation conferences, 24on.; Hitler 
quoted on, 257; replacement urged by 
Goebbels, 257, 260; in Nuremberg 
trial, 512, 514-515; mentioned, 174, 
175 

Riecke, State Secretary in Ministry of 
Food, 436n. 

Riefenstahl, Leni, 61-62, 505 

Ring, Der (architects' society), 18 

Rochling, Hermann (industrialist), 315, 
402, 441 

Rocket plane, 364 

Rockets, 228, 364-369; ground-to-air, 
364, 365-366; various types, 365^-; 
V-2, 365, 367-369; first test firing at 
Peenemiinde, 367; V-2 mass produc- 



Rockets (cont) 

tion, 367, 368, 369, 370; secrecy, 368, 

369 
Roehm, Ernst, Chief of Staff of SA 

(Brown Shirts), 35, 5m., 5*, 53, 83, 87, 

101 
Roehm putsch (1934), 5^-53 
Roesch, General, 26411. 
Rohland, Walter (industrialist), 315, 338, 

358, 446, 448, 459 
Rome, 81; St. Peter's Cathedral, 74, 153, 

155; Pantheon, 153 
Rommel, Field Marshal Erwin, 24a, 246, 

356; as inspector of Atlantic coastal 

defenses, 353-354 
Rooks, Major General, 497 
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 214; Hitler's 

opinion of, 307; news of his death, 

463-464 
Rosenberg, Alfred, 62, 125, 145, 153; 
Myth of the Twentieth Century, 19, 95, 
96; rivalry with other Nazi leaders, 87; 
art looting by, 178; Reich Minister for 
Occupied Eastern Territories, 182, 
197; at end of war, 496; in Nuremberg 
prison, 512; in trial, 515 
Rubens, Peter Paul, 37 
Ruff, Ludwig (architect), 69 
Ruhmann, Heinz (actor), 36, 133 
Ruhr industry: effects of bombing on, 
280-281, 347n.; coal transports cut 
off, 414; loss of, 422; Speer s efforts to 
prevent demolition, 435, 442, 446-448 
"Ruin Value," theory of, 56, 154 
Rundstedt, Field Marshal Gerd von, 355 
Russian army: intelligence reports on de- 
ficiencies of, 169; destroys railroads in 
retreat, 184, 190; winter offensive of 
1942/43, 247-251, 268; casualties, 302; 
1944 summer offensive of, 356-357; 
threatens Upper Silesia, 416; offensive 
of January 1945, 420-422; battle for 
Berlin, 467, 468, 475, 477, 480 
Russians, Hitler's opinion of, 96, 306 



SA (Sturmabteilung— Storm troopers or 
Brown Shirts), 18, 58, 396; Roehm 
Putsch, 51-53 

Saar Palatinate, 438; scorched earth pol- 
icy circumvented, 40211. 

Sachsenhausen, 144 

Salonika, German-British agreement on, 
400 

Sauckel, Fritz, Gauleiter, 123, 212, 216, 
412, 450; in charge of forced labor, 
219-221, 256, 264-265, 309, 310-311, 
320-321, 333, 5i6n; in intrigue against 



Index ( 592 

Speer, 329; in Nuremberg prison, 508; 
in trial, 514, 515, 519 

Sauerbruch, Dr. Ferdinand (surgeon), 
330 

Saur, Karl (department head in Arma- 
ments Ministry), 209n., 231, 289, 317- 
318, 333, 335, 339, 35*, 354, 36g, 
373, 379, 389, 408, 433, 445; impli- 
cates others, after July 20 plot, 391, 
394; ignores command from Hitler on 
fighters, 409; Speer ignored in favor 
of, by Hitler, 415, 419-420, 424-425; 
chosen to succeed Speer, 451, 485; im- 
prisonment, 46211., 503 

Schach, Gerhard, Deputy Gauleiter of 
Berlin, 385 

Schacht, Hjalmar, Minister of Finance, 
97, 197; arrested, 390-391; imprison- 
ment, 504, 505; IQ test, 510; in Nur- 
emberg trial, 515, 519; verdict against, 
522 

Scharoun, Hans (architect), 18 

Schaub, SS Gruppenfuhrer Julius (Hit- 
ler's adjutant), 35, 109, 184, 194, 285, 

299, 333, 389, 437, 451, 464, 478 

Schicklgruber, Alois, g8n. 

Schieber, Walter (department head in 
Armaments Ministry), 2ogn., 336, 
34m., 374 

Schinkel, Karl Friedrich (architect), 26, 
118, 423 

Schirach, Baldur von, head of Hitler 
Youth, and Gauleiter, 261, 276; in 
Nuremberg prison, 514; verdict against, 
522 

Schleicher, General Kurt von, Reich 
Chancellor, 52 

Schlessmann, Gauleiter, 447 

Schmundt, General Rudolf (Hitler's 
Armed Forces adjutant), 117, 162, 236, 
275-276, 295-296; wants Keitel re- 
placed by Kesselring, 244; and Opera- 
tion Valkyrie, 378 

Schnurre, Julius (aide at German Embassy 
in Moscow), 162 

Schorner, Field Marshal Ferdinand, 421- 
422, 487^ 

Schreck (Hitler's driver), 35-36, 66 

Schulenburg, Count Friedrich Werner 
von der, Ambassador to Moscow, 168 

Schultze-Naumburg, Paul (architect), 64 

Schuschnigg, Kurt von, 97, 109, 110 

Schutze, Captain (U-boat commander), 
272 

Schwarz, Franz Xavier (treasurer of Nazi 
Party), 35, 9* 

Schweinfurt ball-bearing plants, 280, 
284, 287; air raids on, 284-286; 



593 ) Index 

"scorched-earth" demolition prevented, 
449-450 

Schwerin-Krosigk, Count Lutz von, 
Finance Minister, 140-141, 428, 489; 
in Doenitz government, 495, 498-499 

Sciences, neglect of, 225-226 

"Scorched earth" policy, 339, 400-405, 
426, 442, 446-460, 471; fears of in- 
dustry, 339, 402; Hitler on, 360; in 
Soviet Russia, 400, 40211.; on Western 
front, 400-402, 457n., 496; in German 
homeland, 402-405, 446-451, 453; in 
various occupied territories, preven- 
tion of, 434, 495-496; Gauleiters 
placed in charge of, 442, 446-447; 
Gauleiters' powers curtailed again, 
455-456; ended by Doenitz, 495-496 

—Hitler's orders, 403, 435-436; order of 
March 19, 1945, 442, 451, 453, of 
March 30, 455-456^, 458n., of April 7, 
460; become more flexible, 471 

— Speeds opposition to, and circumvention 
of, 400-405, 421, 423, 433-437, 441- 
442, 446-451, 457-46o, 461, 467-469, 
480; his memorandum of March 15, 
1945, 436-437, 439; radio address 
planned, 461-462, 468-469, 475-476, 
487; radio address given, 495-496 

Sculpture, 42, 67, 145, 154 

SD (Sicherheitsdienst, SS Security Serv- 
ice), 458 

"Searchlight architecture," 58-59 

"Secret weapons," 364, 365^; V-i flying 
bomb, 355-356, 364; Me-262 jet plane, 
362-364; propaganda and rumors, 409- 
411, 449; poison gas tabun, 413. See 
also Rockets 

Seebauer (department head in Arma- 
ments Ministry), 20911. 

Semper, Gottfried (architect), 41 

"Septemberlings," 20 

Seydlitz, General Walter von, 394n. 

Seyss-Inquart, Arthur, Reich Commissar 
for the Netherlands, 457, 497; desig- 
nated Foreign Minister, 487; IQ test 
score, 510; in Nuremberg Trial, 511, 
513, 515, 5i6, 520 

Shipbuilding programs, 273-274 

Shipping: "scorched earth" orders, 453, 
456n.; Speer's efforts to prevent dem- 
olitions, 457, 469 

Siedler, Eduard Jobst (architect), 34 

Signal Corps: destruction of communica- 
tions facilities ordered, 451; order re- 
voked, 460 

Silesia, 421, 422. See also Upper Silesia 

Simon, Gauleiter, 40211. 

Skorzeny, SS Sturmbannfuhrer Otto, 387 



Slave labor. See Forced labor 
Smend, Lieutenant Colonel Gunther, 391 
Social Democrats, 14; persecution of, 33 
Sorpe Valley dam, bombing of, 281 
Soviet Russia: pavilion at Paris World's 
Fair of 1937, 81; Hitler's nonaggression 
pact with, 161-162; friendship treaty 
with, and Polish partition, 168; intel- 
ligence on military deficiencies of, 169; 
attack on Finland, 169; Hitler plans 
attack on, 173, 180; German invasion 
of (1941), 180-181, 182, 183; German 
plans for "new cities" in, 182; German 
railroad problems in, winter 1941/42, 
184-185, 190-191; German offensive 
of 1942 in, 236-239; army movements 
of 1943 in, 268-270; German air war- 
fare in, 282-283; "scorched earth" 
policy in German retreat, 400, 40211.; 
armistice with Finland, 405; Hitler's 
final views about, 422, 440; in posses- 
sion of Balkans, 434. See also Russian 
army 
Spain, Speer's trip through, 184 
Spandau prison, 523-524 
Specialization: professional, as cause of 
political naivete, 33, 112-113; Nazi 
education aimed at, 112, 123 
Speer, Albert: ancestors of, 3-4; child- 
hood and adolescence of, 4-9; boyhood 
disability of, 5, 7; causes of political 
naivete^ 7-8, 19, 112; choice of pro- 
fession, 9; student of architecture, 9- 
12; racial attitudes, 11, 19-20; first 
encounters with Hitler, 15-16, 17-18, 
23, 28-31; Nazi party membership of, 
17-20, 177; acceptance of his guilt, 19, 
20, 112-113, 2i9n., 370, 375-376, 
489, 510-511, 516, 523; becomes Hit- 
ler's architect 31; reflections about his 
role, 32-33, 112-113, 339, 34*, 345, 
375-376, 431-432, 476-477; fondness 
for Doric architecture, 62-63; his 
home, 63; his fees and salary, 63-64, 
76; family life of, 64; appointed In- 
spector General of Buildings, 76-77; as 
Obersalzberg resident, 84; Golden 
Party Badge conferred on, 115; archi- 
tectural offices of, 144-145; personal 
friends of, 145-146; end-of-war pro- 
visions for his family, 146, 465; resigns 
his party offices, 177; appointed Min- 
ister of Armaments and Munitions, 
194-195, 197-203; appointed Minister 
of Armaments and War Production, 
275; cooling of relationship with Hitler, 
313, 316-317, 320-321, 330, 332- 
335, 337-342, 345, 415, 419-420; ill- 



Speer, Albert (cont.) 
ness, 323, 327, 330-332, 334; convales- 
cence, 333-335; offer to resign, 338- 
339; honorary Nazi ranks offered to, 
and refused by, 369; offers his personal 
fortune for benefit of the Reich, 428; 
plans to kill Hitler, 429-431, 517; per- 
sonal end-of-war preparations of, 461, 
465, 494-495; last meeting with Hitler, 
476-477, 478-481, 485; imprisonment 
and trial of, 500-523 

Speer Construction Staff, 190 

Speidel, General Wilhelm, 171, 172, 394». 

Spengler, Oswald, 16, 185; Decline of the 
West, 12 

Sperrle, Field Marshal Hugo, 197»-, 271 

Spitzweg, Carl (painter), 44, 90 

SS (Schutzstaffel-Black Shirts), 45; my- 
thology, Hitler on, 94, 95; concentra- 
tion camp labor, 144, 369-371, 375; 
and Russian POWs, 268-269; intrudes 
on V-2 production (Central Works), 
369, 370-371, 412; business enter- 
prises of, 372, 373-374; labor camps, 
374; arrests of foreign workers by, 
374; persecution of July 20 con- 
spirators by, 387. See also Waffen SS 

Stadiums: Nuremberg, plans for, 68; 
Olympic, Berlin, 80 

Stahl, Dieter (industrialist), 425, 430-431 

Stalin, Joseph, 155, 168, 390; Hitler's 
nonaggression pact with, 161-162; 
friendship treaty with, and Polish 
partition, 168; Hitler's respect for, 
306, 422; son of, 306 

Stalingrad, 215, 236, 247-250; Goebbels 
on, 254-255 

State socialism, 359 

Stauffenberg, Colonel Claus Schenk, Graf 
von, 378, 380, 381, 383, 384; executed, 
388 

Steel: crude, needs for, 221-222; high- 
strength, manganese for, 315-316 

Steyr, ball-bearing plant, 285, 286 

Stieff, General Helmut, 379, 382n., 383 

Stimson, Harry L., quoted, 52on. 

Stinnes, Hugo (industrialist), 39411. 

Stohr, Gauleiter, 441-442 

Strasser, Gregor (head of organization, 
Nazi Party), 61 

Streicher, Julius, Gauleiter, 35, 59, 62, 
101; in Nuremberg prison, 512; in trial, 
513, 519 

"Strength through Joy" movement ("Kraft 
durch Freude"), 57 

Strolin, Karl, Mayor of Stuttgart, 507 

Stuckart, Wilhelm, State Secretary of 



Index ( 594 

Ministry of the Interior, 258, 313; in 
Doenitz government, 497-498 
Student, General Kurt, 476 
Students, Hitler's appeal to, 14-16 
Submachine guns, 319 
Submarines. See U-boats 
Sudetenland, annexation of, 111 
Suhrkamp, Peter (publisher), 394n. 
"Suicide squad," 412-413 
Synagogues, destruction of, 111-112 



T-34 tank, Russian, 233 

Tabun (poison gas), 413-414 

Tank destroyer rocket (Panzerfaust), 413 

Tanks, 233-234, 420; production figures, 
210; German Tiger, first use of, 241; 
highest production priority, 273; Hit- 
ler's emphasis on production of, 273, 
351, 368, 445 

Taut, Bruno (architect), 18 

Technocracy, 520-521; The Observer 
quoted on, 344-345 

Technology, Head Office for, 194 

Terboven, Josef, Reich Commissar for 
Norway, 496 

Tessenow, Heinrich (architect), 11, 12, 
13-14, 18, 22, 27, 33, 38, 62, 145; 
cultural ideas of, compared with Hit- 
ler's, 14-15 

Teutonic Empire. See Germanic Empire 

Thierack, Otto Georg, Minister of Justice, 
258, 445 

Thomale, General Wolfgang, 415, 466 

Thomas, General Georg, 183, 200, 303, 
504 

Thorak, Josef (sculptor), 145, 146 

Thyssen, Fritz (industrialist), 504 

Tiger tank, 234, 241 

Times, The (London), 215 

Tix, Arthur (industrialist, head of Ord- 
nance Directive Committee), 396 

Todt, Dr. Fritz, Minister of Armaments 
and Munitions, 83, 108, 180, 183, 185, 
191-192, 208; background and charac- 
terization of, 193; letter quoted, 193- 
194; death of, 193, 196-197; positions 
held by, 194; Speer appointed succes- 
sor to, 194-195, 198-199; mentioned, 
76, 82, 144, 231, 337 

Todt Organization, 194, 269, 3i5»-, 318, 
328, 336, 356, 381, 382n., 417 

Topp, Admiral, 273 

Totalitarian government, 112-113; and 
technocracy, 520-521 

Transportation: problems, 222-224; 1944 
air raid effects, 224; coal shortage, 
414; problem in Ardennes offensive, 



595 ) todex 

416, 417; Speer's efforts to prevent 
demolition of facilities, 435-437, 441, 
442, 457, 460, 462, 467-469; complete 
breakdown, 438; "scorched earth" 
order of March 29, 1945, 453, 456n. 
Transportation, Ministry of, shake-up, 

222-224 
Treaty of Locarno, 72 
Trondheim, Norway, plans for German 

naval base at, 181-182 
Troost, Paul Ludwig (architect), 39, 40- 
41, 42-43, 49, 50, 62, 80, 135, 159; 
remodeling of Chancellor's apartment 
by, 28, 30, 117, 118, 119 
Troost, Mrs. Paul L., 37, 39, 50-51, 80 
Truman, Harry S., mentioned, 464 
Tukhachevsky Marshal Mikhail N., 390 
Tunis, German surrender at, 292 
Turkey, source of chromium, 317, 405 
Typhoon rocket, 36sn. 

U-boats, 166, 271-274; shelters for, 
along Atlantic, 194, 272; production 
of, 272, 273-274; withdrawn from At- 
lantic, 292; one-man submarine, 412 

Udet, General Ernst, 175, 494; suicide, 

291 

Uiberreither, Siegfried, Gauleiter, 457- 
458n. 

Ukraine: Speer's construction assignment 
in, 185, 189-191; forced labor from, 
221; 1942 German offensive, 236-237 

Unconditional surrender: Allied demand 
for, 293; signed, 497 

Uniforms, use of, 56^-57, 110 

United States: Hitler's disparaging re- 
marks about, 107, 121, 459; war pro- 
duction, 183, 273, 289; organizational 
methods, 210, 211; nuclear research, 
226, 228n., 229. See also U.S. Air 
Force 

Untersberg legend, 86 

Upper Silesia (coal region): Russian threat 
to, 416, 422; loss of, 424; Speer visit 
to, 434, 435; bridges saved, 457 

Uranium motor, 227 

Urban renewal, 77~79, *39, 314-3*5 

U.S. Air Force: raids on Germany, 284- 
286, 289-290, 363, 478; Eighth, 332, 
346, 348, 499, 500; Fifteenth, 332, 
338, 348; raids from Italian bases, 338 

U.S. Economic Warfare Division, paper 
on selective bombing, 352 

U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey (USSBS), 
499 

V-i flying bomb, 355-356 
V-2 rocket, 365, 367-370 



Valkyrie, Operation, 378-379, 381. See 
also Putsch of July 20, 1944 

Vienna: Hitler's admiration of architec- 
ture of, 41-42, 75; Hitler's unfavorable 
memories of, 98, 99 

Vlaminck, Maurice de, 184, 503 

Vogler, Albert (industrialist), 200-201, 
212, 225, 394n., 416 

Volkischer Beohachter (newspaper), 125, 
403 

Volkssturm (People's Militia), 450, 463 

Von Braun, Wernher. See Braun, 
Wernher von 

Vorhoelzer (architect), 51 



W 2 headquarters, Hitler's, 356 

Wackerle, Josef (sculptor), 39, 119 

Waeger, General (department head in 
Armaments Ministry), 336, 34m. 

Waffen-SS (military units of the SS), 240, 
382n., 390, 399; and POW's, 268; in 
Ardennes offensive, 417, 418; planned 
"surprise" offensive in Balkans, 434 

Wagner, Admiral, 498 

Wagner, Adolf, Gauleiter of Bavaria, 35, 
40 

Wagner, General Eduard, Quartermaster 
General, 379, 382n., 383 

Wagner, Richard, 9, 60 90, 128, 249 

Wagner, Robert, Gauleiter of Baden, 449 

Wagner, Winifred, 66, 130, 150 

Wagner family (Bayreuth), 150 

Wallot, Paul (architect), 151 

Walter, Horst (adjutant to SS General 
Dietrich), 332 

War economy: diversion of materials for 
Hitler's building program, 177, 180; 
overextension of resources, 182-186; 
overlapping and conflicting responsi- 
bilities, 182-183, 195, 196, 200-203, 
218-219, 397; fuel shortage, 182, 346- 
348, 350-351, 406; waste resulting 
from interservice rivalry, 183, 199- 
203, 3650-, 379, 380, 3&an.; Goering's 
amateurish handling of, 183; as part of 
Four-Year Plan, 183, 194, 200, 201- 
202; democratic principles reintroduced 
by Speer, 211; turning point, 215; 
labor problems, 217-221, 255, 269, 
312, 320-321; Central Planning office 
created, 221; transportation problems, 
222-224, 414, 438; austerity programs, 
255-256, 257; programs blocked, 256, 
274, 312-313; all production placed 
under Speer, 274-275; Nazi party in- 
terference in, 329, 359, 396-397; col- 
s, 412; Speer's last reports on, 



Index ( 596 



War economy (cont) 

424-425, 436-437. See also Arma- 
ments; Consumer goods; Industry 

Warlimont, General Walter, 244 

Warsaw, destruction of, 173, 227 

Washington, D.C.: Hitler quoted on, 76; 
neoclassicist buildings, 81; Capitol, 154 

Waterfall (C-2) rocket, 365-366 

Weber, Christian (Nazi Party function- 
ary), 101 

Wegener, Paul, Gauleiter, 498 

Weidemann, Hans (Nazi Party function- 
ary), 27 

Weimar, 64, 216; a "reconstruction city," 
176 

Weimar Republic, 8, 29, 33; inflation, 
9-10; political situation of early i93o's, 
19; electoral system of, nominally re- 
tained by Hitler, 152 

Weiss, General, 434 

"Werewolves," 469 

West Wall, 194 

Westermann, Gerhart von (General Man- 
ager of Berlin Philharmonic), 463 

Westphal, General Siegried, 448 

Wiedemann, Fritz (adjutant of Hitler), 
121 

Wilhelm II, Kaiser, 42, 67, 170 

Wilhelmshaven, British air raid on, 165 

Winter, General, 457 

Witzell, Admiral Karl, 200, 201, 205, 
225, 367 

Witzleben, Field Marshal Erwin von, 395 

Wolf, Johanna (Hitler's chief secretary), 
338, 472 



Wolton, Lord, 108 

Women, German, unmobilized in World 
War II, 220-221, 320 

World's Fair of 1937, Paris, 67, 81 

World War I: Speer's boyhood memories 
of, 6-7; Hitler's memories of his ser- 
vice, 120-121, 241; Hitler on German 
mistakes of, 164, 169-170; armaments 
production, 213, 221; woman labor, 
220 

World War H: German expectation of, 
and timing, 162-164; Allied war dec- 
larations, 164-165; Hitler's miscalcula- 
tions at start of, 164-166; lack of 
popular support for, 166-167; com- 
parisons with First World War, 213, 
220, 221; turning points, 215, 292. 
See also Homefront; War economy 

Yalta Conference, 426 

Zangen, Wilhelm (industrialist), 200 
Zeitzler, General Kurt, army Chief of 
Staff, 240, 269, 275, 276, 336; wants 
Commander in Chief of army ap- 
pointed, 270-271; at situation con- 
ferences, 240, 305, 421; in Stalingrad 
crisis, 247-248, 249-250; and defense 
of Nikopol, 315-316; misinformation 
about Speer's illness, 334^-; dismissal 
of, 391; mentioned, 383 
Zeppelin Field, Nuremberg, 55, 56 
Ziegenberg, Hitler's HQ at, 169, 418 
Zintsch, State Secretary in Ministry of 
Education, 43611. 